
 
André Linden

 
Osage

 
The other story
 

 

                                                                                                 To the Boomers of '65

 











 Osage © 2025 by André Linden is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0













  






                                     Main Street by Minnetta Good (1939) - The Metropolitan Museum of Art
 
  
  
 A word is worth a thousand pictures















I - Waiting for a train

  




1
 
 





Woodward, Oklahoma, August 1965
 
As I sit perched on the upper floor of my Pullman car, stirring from my slumber, I watch the platform of Woodward's small station already receding into the distance. The rhythmic clacking of the Atcheson, Topeka and Santa Fe's wheels on the tracks reminds me that I am locked up for two days and two nights in a steel cage rolling on steel.
 Then there is the ocher, gray plain, the blinding reddish dust under the steel blue sky, dotted with dried bushes and that almost lunar horizon, flat for three hundred and sixty degrees all around, without a shrub, without a mound, without the slightest monument rising even slightly except its immense grain silo with multiple towers, windowless, standing behind the small station like a medieval fortress in the middle of this ghastly land, the largest no man's land on the planet.
No man's land—better known by its unofficial name, the Cimarron Territory, it's the famous Panhandle, this strip of land shaped like the handle of a pan, extending 170 miles, which stretches Oklahoma along its border with Kansas to the north and Texas to the southwest. Harboring traces of human habitation dating back several millennia, once populated by the Cherokees and Sioux and opened to settlers starting in 1889, this region was hit by drought in the 1930s. Poor land management led to dust storms swirling for several summers, earning it the nickname of Dust Bowl, forcing farmers struck by the Great Depression to emigrate to California in the hope of a better future, only to find John Steinbeck's grapes of wrath.
Seated on the upper deck of the air-conditioned Pullman car, I watch the town recede and disappear into the horizon. Although it is not part of the Panhandle, but of what was once called the Cherokee Outlet, with three other localities Woodward served as the starting point for the settlers' rush westward in 1893. Troops were stationed there to oversee the orderly occupation of the new territories opened to white settlers after their purchase from their Native American occupants by the federal government in the aftermath of the Civil War.

The Cherokees, members of the Five Nations Tribe, had their possession contested by white settlers, who accused them of collaborating with the Confederates during the Civil War. It was only in the 1880s that the federal government proposed leasing their lands to them. The Cherokees, who initially refused the offer, eventually sold them.
One of the foremost experts on conflicts between white settlers and Native Americans was the Texan lawyer Temple Lea Houston. He was the son of Sam Houston, the first elected president of the Republic of Texas, who had helped liberate it from Mexican rule at the Battle of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836—a battle that lasted only eighteen minutes. Temple Lea Houston arrived in Woodward in 1893, where he participated in the opening of the rush for new territories.
After bringing his wife and four children there, he also founded a newspaper, the Woodward News. I had worked part-time as a trainee in the printing shop of the town's only daily, the Woodward Daily Press to learn newspaper printing - I wanted to be a journalist; didn't I already see myself as the future editor-in-chief of the New York Times? 
I didn't realize that its predecessor had been founded by probably the most prominent figure in Woodward.
In a bookstore in the city, I had stumbled upon Edna Ferber's 1929 best-seller Cimarron. I could only regret not having read it sooner as it attracted me so much. Its title intrigued me. Cimarron is not only the unofficial name of the famous Panhandle, but also the name of a river that flows quite a distance east of Woodward, between it and the city of Enid. I would sometimes take walks along its arid banks and in its often-dry riverbed, due to the low water density. I thought this book would help me get to know the area better.
Cimarron was adapted several times into successful films and television series. When I returned home in the evening to my venerable colonial-style house, one of the oldest in Woodward, on Oklahoma Avenue, after I had finished my homework, I immersed myself in the novel by Edna Ferber, who had begun her career as a journalist. But to my great disappointment, it did not mention the name of Woodward. 
The novelist had called the city where she set her story Osage, which is also that of one of the main tribes of the Indian Territory. Her protagonist, a young lawyer of Texan origin, Yancey "Cimarron" Cravat, did not resemble any resident of Woodward either.
To further confuse the reader, the author had stated in her preface that the setting of the action was imaginary. Some located it in Guthrie, east of Woodward and the main gathering point for settlers at the start of the westward rush in 1889. Others tought it was Enid.
Disappointed, I was about to give up on reading the novel when a particular detail caught my eye: the description of the newspaper that young Cravat had founded in Osage bore striking similarities to the daily I worked for, the Woodward Daily Press. 
The ancestor of our newspaper, the Woodward News, had been founded by Temple Lea Houston. From then on, the connection between him and the character invented by Edna Ferber, Yancey Cravat, and thus between the city of Osage and Woodward, to the point that one became indistinguishable from the other in my mind, became inevitable for me. But I had no way to prove it. 
With Edna Ferber's novel as my guide, I therefore undertook my own investigation into the city's past.

    











 


Woodward, Oklahoma Territory, 1894
 
In the sweltering summer heat, a tall, slightly stooped man in his thirties, wearing a white Stetson with the Texas star in front, six-shot Colt on his belt, arrives in Woodward seated at the front of a boxcar, rolling painfully along the settlement's wide main street - a gaping wound, dotted with empty tin cans, across the plain. 
As the boxcar rattles to a stop, the man swings open the tarpaulin-covered door and steps out into the scorching Oklahoma sun. The dusty main street stretches before him like an empty canvas. He adjusts his Stetson hat and gazes around at the makeshift town.
The newcomer spent days in this tarpaulin-covered wagon, with no sound to accompany him other than the rustle of the wind in the brush, the occasional stomp of horses' hooves on the dry clay, the murmur of a nearby river. He let himself be tossed across an ocean of plains to this small, single-street town, an incredibly wide street, at least a hundred and fifty feet wide. This typical Western town, barely a year old, is built entirely along Main Street, that vast single street, unlike the smaller towns of his native Texas, built around a square of empty land. 
The air is thick with the smell of sweat, dirt, and fresh-cut wood as he takes stock of the town, his eyes squinting against the glare.
The traveler discovers a town that became overnight a mass of settlers, soldiers, railroad workers, cattle ranchers and revolver-carrying cowboys. All around him, on either side, are wooden shacks, Indians, dried mud, lookout posts, dogs and covered wagons like his own. The street stops just as abruptly at each end and suddenly becomes deserted again.
There's this Main Street - absurdly named because it's the only street, wide to the point of absurdity. Here and there, a stray house or another stands out. There are tents that he can see are still being used as shelters, as they were last year by the settlers during the rush to the new territories. The buildings and stores are made of wood with no paint covering. They look like they were erected overnight, without regard to any order, and in fact they were. They look straight at the rutted clay of the road, and the muddy road looks back at them. The blazing sky burns with brutal intensity over both, without ever a tree or patch of greenery to brighten the spirit or rest the eyes. 
The stranger sees all manners of vehicles lashed to bollards set deep into the ground: ramshackle carts, tarpaulin-less dumpers, trailers pulled by mules. Here and there a buggy covered in desert dust. And everywhere, the dominant, four-legged kings without whom life in this remote place would not be possible - horses of all sizes, kinds, colors and ages, Indian ponies, pintos, saddle horses, racy horses, high on their slender legs, rangers, their manes and tails blowing in the wind.
The newcomer hears the sound of hammer and saw, the clanking of chains, the dull thud of hooves, all sharp and distinct, as if this mushroom town were digging itself out of the red clay of the plain by its own spurs before his eyes. He soon notices that the men aren't doing a thing. They lie between door frames and against bollards, chattering away. He hears their voices in animated conversations inside saloons, stores and offices. They trot along at a leisurely pace, twisting and turning and trotting again. The newcomer soon realizes that many of these men are not builders but sweepers. The old indomitable men of the '49s, when the California Trail passed through here during the gold rush, are not among them. 
He knows them all too well: they are not the average outlaws. They're often gentle, cruel, furtive and greedy. They've gathered here to pick up what they can and leave. Some are desperate cowherds who lost everything, their livelihoods, their homes, their families. They are full of bitterness against a government that has taken away their land and given it to settlers. 
Deprived of their only occupation, many have become not just outlaws but ghosts, haunting hillsides and terrorizing nearby towns. Armed with six-shot colts, deadly aim, and a miraculous gift for horsemanship, they melt down from their hidden haunts on a town to shoot up a bank, board a train and rob it before taking off again, leaving nothing but blood behind them. They risk their lives for a few hundred dollars. 
The traveler has arrived in a vast domain without laws, without precedents, without the habits of civilization, a place where a horse is worth more than a human life. A horse thief, if caught, is summarily hanged from the nearest tree. A murderer often gets away scot-free.
A few rare street walkers pass him by, sometimes with a brief sideways glance at the stranger who has just arrived in town. He looks for a hotel that's still open. He finally finds one, whose sign creaking in the wind announces Cattle King Hotel. He ties the harness of his exhausted horse to a bollard away from the other carts cluttering the sidewalk, grabs the two boxes contained in his covered wagon and sets them down on the ground. 
Alone on the deserted sidewalk, his travel bag slung over his shoulder, he takes a long breath of air. And the air seems pungent, as if laden with antimony powder or weighted down with fine drops of liquid lead. A hot wind blows desert dust into his nostrils, eyes, mouth and ears. It seeps everywhere, through his clothes, into his pockets. And the stranger understands that it's this new enemy he'll have to deal with: the wind.
For a moment, he is seized with panic, with the absurd urge to retreat, to flee. But it's too late now. He is caught in his own trap. He grabs his two crates and climbs up the hotel steps, his boots scuffling against their worn wood as he trudges up the staircase. An elderly, faded receptionist with large, pearly glasses raises her frozen-fish eyes from her ledger. She is struck by his swarthy face that could be mistaken for an Indian's - does he have Cherokee blood, she wonders -, his very long black frock coat, between the flaps of which she sees a magnificent white-handled Colt in a stamped leather holster, hanging from a wide leather belt with a silver buckle. It's impossible not to notice the newcomer's extravagant costume. He wears a yellow-beaded vest and Spanish-style, satin-striped pants with intricate patterns over unusually small riding boots of the finest leather. 
With his head bowed like a buffalo he exerts a sinister fascination on her.
She finds something cruel in the stranger's mouth, straight and curved down at the corners. The small gray eyes have a furtive look except when they stare at her intensely. When he smiles, his lips are pressed together over even, white teeth. 
She's surprised by his beautiful way of expressing himself, so rare here. When he doesn't think he's being watched, he has a curious habit of playing with the chestnut hair that unfurls in curly locks over his shoulders. 
She gives him the usual form to fill in. She asks:
- Are you a new settler?
- No, I'm a lawyer. I already own my plot of land here. I registered it with the town land registry on September 16…
-September 16... the opening day of the race for new land?
-That's right. I watched the famous race from a Santa Fe boxcar near the land registry office. I'm from St. Louis. 
- From St. Louis? Well, well... You don't often see visitors from so far away, let alone lawyers.
-I'm legal counsel for the Atcheson, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad. I plan to open a law office here and bring my wife and our four children. 
-But what an idea to choose a hole like this to open your office in. Well, since you've already got your piece of land... Not everyone among the newcomers has been so lucky, she continues.
- I also plan to start a newspaper.
The receptionist looks troubled at these last words. She first looks down, then back up at the newcomer, then looks away, uncomfortable.
-Oh, a newspaper, eh?
The man notices her confusion.
-We do have a newspaper, The New Day...
-A daily?
-A weekly. But rumor has it it's for sale.
There's something sinister about her words.
-Why?
-Well, it seems that its owner - his name was La Salle, Jack La Salle - died in strange circumstances. That was last week. The paper has since ceased publication.
A short silence follows. 
-Was he murdered?
A small shadow of pained surprise passes over the receptionist's features. 
-He was just found dead on the banks of the North Canadian River. Bullet wounds. But all bullets look alike here. He could have shot himself, after hitting the bottom.
-If he had killed himself, one bullet would have been enough, wouldn't it?
Silence falls again. 
-Otherwise, nothing ever happens here. Well... welcome to the wonderful town of Woodward, Mr. Lawyer, she exclaims with a burst of laughter.
She hands him his keys and points to his room on the second floor. As he climbs the creaky staircase, his two crates at arm's length, after advising her to keep an eye on his horse and carriage, she takes her time to read the information her new and only client of the day has entered on his card. She can read :
Houston, Temple Lea. Born in 1860 in Austin, Texas. Son of Houston, Margaret Lea and Houston, Sam, first president-elect of the Republic of Texas.
She wants to follow him with her eyes, but he’s already disappeared. He enters his room, exhausted from the journey. He deposits his two boxes on the floor and his travel bag on the only chair. He unbuckles his wide leather belt with his pair of six-shot colts, their menacing heads emerging from their holsters. He throws himself fully clothed onto the narrow bed, a large wooden box with a dubious mattress, in the small room with cardboard-thin walls, simple pine slats with cracks between them. 
The next morning, the traveler planned to meet his long-time friend, John E. Love, the sheriff. They're both from Texas. But the story of the murdered journalist intrigues him.
Tomorrow, I'm going to visit that newspaper, he says to himself.
Then he falls asleep.

 
 











2


 As soon as he’s up, after leaving his horse and carriage in the care of the hotel staff, Temple Lea Houston walks to the New Day. Along Main Street, which curves around to the east, shops, restaurants, haberdasheries and ready-to-wear services follow one another in buildings with trompe-l'oeil fronts. He sees two banks, two sawmills, three filled barns, an ice factory, a laundry, a bottling plant, twenty-three saloons and as many brothels. 
The town's only newspaper occupies a small, one-story, flat-roofed building on the south side of Main Street. The entrance, which cuts across the corner of which it forms the base, is closed. The door is sealed.
Despite these, Houston presses the handle and finds the door unlocked. He enters. He finds himself in a small room separated in two by a counter, which serves both as a reception area and a 

newsroom. The latter is empty. Behind the counter are five desks. He wonders which one this La Salle, who was found dead in the sandy bed of the river that runs northeast of the city, occupied. 
To the right of the room, a vast double panel of bakelite stained with oil and ink conceals what must undoubtedly have been the printing works. Houston opens it. 
The visitor finds himself in a vast dark room from which emerge mechanical forms, the hand press on one side and two linotypes on the other, with arms as long as spider legs. All these machines are at a standstill. 
Not a human presence between the machines. A vast glass pane covered in dust and grime diffuses a gloomy aquarium glow across the room. A pungent smell of ink, oil, lead filings, dust and human sweat grips his throat.
Piled up in one corner of the workshop is the bric-a-brac of what must have been the old printing shop: a small hand press, two six-column forms, a rack containing printing type, ink rollers, a stock of paper, a box of ink, tubes of working ink, a box of wooden elbows used to lock the forms. 
Houston intends to replace this now useless equipment with the new printing material contained in the two crates he left at the hotel.
Through a large sliding door opening onto the street, the warm wind blows swirls of reddish dust across the workshop. The wind of the Great Plains. It scratches the walls and windows. It lifts the sheets of smudged paper from the marble. 
There's no way to stop the wind. A whole brigade couldn't stop it with rifles. The wind! It's going to stick to him for as long as he stays in this pandemonium.
Houston is about to step outside when his foot treads on a copy of The New Day, crumpled and smeared with oil and ink stains. It's dated the week before the journalist was murdered. He unfolds the paper and spreads it on a table. He discovers the names of members of the local government, whom La Salle, in his latest editorial, accuses of robbing the Indians of their monthly allowances and cheating the settlers. He explains how they got their whiskey, despite it being forbidden. 
Poor man, mutters the Texan. He had probably named his newspaper The New Day because he believed in the possibility of starting a clean, unblemished life here, in clean politics instead of the surrounding corruption, in a new way of living and thinking, and he said so in his last editorial. Here, he wrote, everything is new. Everything is to be done, and we can do it. Nowhere in the world has there ever been such an opportunity. We can make this land of Oklahoma into a model empire, taking advantage of all the mistakes of the settlers of the past. New England, California and the settlers of the Middle West didn't, and they fell into a rut. Dirty politics, dirty cities, dirty buildings, dirty minds. 
The dirty minds didn't appreciate it. His sincerity earned the author of these lines his life. 





It’s time for the visitor to go to his friend, Sheriff John E. Love. But I'll find La Salle's murderers, bring them to justice and not rest until I see them hanging from a tree, he says to himself as he leaves the newspaper.
 









 -Temple!
-Hello, Jack. Still on duty, I see.
Past the warmth of the reunion with his old Texan friend, John E. Love, Woodward's first sheriff, Houston explains why he's come. 
-You should have told me so I could pick you up at the station. 
-I didn't come by train, but by my own means. I’m looking for lodgings. Why don't you tell me what Woodward's been like since September 16th? 
-You wouldn't recognize the town. It's changed a lot since you came here to see the opening of the Cherokee Land rush. The town that a handful of European and American settlers built in 1887 at the intersection of the Southern Kansas and Santa Fe railroads saw some fifty thousand more rush to the Cherokee Land when it opened on September 16. It didn't take four days for Woodward to form a provisional government and elect officials. In fact, due to a topographical location error, there are now two towns in one - an official town and the depot town along the Santa Fe railroad, separated by half a mile. 
-That's where I'd like to open my office, since I'm Santa Fe's legal advisor. My two colleagues Jerry Rowland Dean and Sidney Benton Laune have already opened theirs there. I'm going to offer to join them.
-I'll see what I can do. But you should know that the Santa Fe division employs some three hundred and fifty men in its railroad roundhouse and workshops, and disputes between workers and bosses are not uncommon. Your two colleagues know all about it. To the northwest of the city, Fort Supply, some eight miles from here - that's where I have my ranch - is home to some five hundred new residents, including military personnel, with a monthly salary of seven thousand five hundred dollars. This military presence, which the local population is increasingly resentful of, is a remnant of General Sheridan's 1868 winter campaign against the Indians of the Southern Plains. There is even talk of closing the fort and turning it into an insane asylum. Since last year, no less than six million pounds of goods have been transported by wagon from the Santa Fe station to Fort Supply, and another million have been sent to the postal exchange. But the locals haven't seen any of it.
-Well, that's bread and butter for a new lawyer, for whom being first here is better than second in Washington D. C. 
-In less than a year, Woodward has become Oklahoma's cattle empire. It's a major livestock and feed supply center for Kansas, Nebraska, Missouri and Iowa. It has even become the world's largest cattle shipping point. But most of them don't see the benefits of such traffic. Only a minority benefit. After the opening of the territories, over two hundred and fifty wagons were loaded in thirty days. These cattle came not only from local ranches but also from counties drawn in the Cheyenne-Arapajo country, still open and free because many settlers, finding it too far from a railroad and not conducive to agriculture, refused to squander their property rights over the area and pushed to enter the Land. 
-In their place, I would have done the same.
-Other huge herds were moved overland from the ranges of the Wichita-Caddo and Kiowa-Comanche-Apache reservations, Greer County and the Green River. Four thousand three hundred 
cars were loaded at Woodward during the year. You see, where there was only an arid, windswept plain when you arrived, settlement has made it in less than a year a center, not only of America, but of the world for the transportation of livestock and freight by rail. 

 







-Indeed, when I arrived, I could see that saddled horses for hire in the ranches, wagons, buggies and hitching racks lined up on the racks, and that the town was full of cowboys. But what intrigues me most is last week's murder of journalist La Salle. 
-So you already know? Found dead in the sandy bed of the North Canadian River. Shot to death. We're stalling in our investigation at the moment. My patrols thought they saw men from the Dalton gang and Billy the Kid prowling around, but there's no evidence to link them to this crime. Neither the Dalton brothers nor the Kid kill with premeditation. They only do it because they feel cheated by the government, which sold their land to the settlers. So we have to look elsewhere. I say we, since you so generously offer your collaboration, which I gladly accept. It certainly won't go amiss.
- I found this copy of The New Day in the newspaper's workshop, where I had no trouble getting in, despite your seals - sorry, but they need to be revised (he takes the crumpled, stained newspaper out of his pocket). It's dated two weeks ago. In it, La Salle had signed what was probably his last editorial, in which he denounced, by name, certain city politicians and businessmen involved in the expropriation of Indian land. 
-Yes, I know. 
-What more can you tell me? I intend to find out who killed the journalist, too, and take him to court.
In response, Love hands him a bill, on which Houston reads:
Sheriff, a word of advice: stay out of the La Salle case.
-I get messages like this from time to time. Usually, they have no effect on me, except to make me more vigilant. If you wish to follow this case on your own, I can only recommend that you do the same. The people who planned La Salle's murder are very dangerous. You have the reputation of being the sharpest gun in the West, but in this kind of business, you can never be too vigilant. Here, lost bullets aren't lost on everyone.
-I have what it takes to respond, I have my two Betsy sisters, says Houston, stroking the grips of his two white six-shot colts. But most of all, I've got the law on my side. With that, I leave you and go in search of lodgings.

 



3
 

In the afternoon, after collecting his horse, wagon and belongings from the Cattle King Hotel, Houston goes to the law offices of his colleagues Dean and Laune, close to the railroad tracks, not far from the Santa Fe railroad roundhouse and warehouses. Judge Dean lives in a large house he built on the site he chose on the opening day of the race for the territories. He, too, is sorry that Houston didn't let him know he was coming, and immediately offers to put him up in his own home until he can find a place of his own. 
Although their house is full of their children and grandchildren, the judge and his wife give him a warm welcome. The next day, he takes Houston to the firm, where the newly arrived visitor meets his partner, Sidney Laune. It didn't take long for the two lawyers to accept Houston's offer to become partners.
With the deal closed, Houston returns to the city in search of a proper home. He spots a small four-room building, two in the front and two sheds in the back, and realizes that a railroad engineer who had lived there has just been transferred to Kansas. A sign in front of the entrance reads:
For sale
The house is empty. But its interior surprises him with the way its former occupant managed to make it attractive and comfortable. In fact, it looks like every other house in Woodward, no bigger, no smaller, no better, no worse.
The owner lives in the building next door. In less than an hour, Houston has concluded the purchase of his home with him. He then sets out on foot for the city, visiting saloons and gambling halls to gather evidence about La Salle's murder. 
Wherever he comes across a small group of three or four lazing on the porch of a saloon or store or on a street corner, he asks: how did La Salle come to be killed? The effect of the question is always the same. At first, his interlocutors appear sociable, chatting, rolling cigarettes, citizens at ease in their long-sleeved shirts. Houston strides towards them, light and elegant, in his white sombrero, long black coat and high-heeled boots. He asks his question. As if by magic, the group disperses, moves away, fades away.
Sometimes he's advised not to ask questions. When he asks why, the answer is almost always:
- Because it's better for you.
Then his interlocutor disappears in turn.
The next day, as he strolls down Main Street in the morning sunlight, he's sure to cause a stir. Slender rangers in their carts turn to stare at him. Slackers on porches elbow each other, yawning. Chattering cowboys shout at him:
-Hi, Temple! 
The whole town seems already aware of his arrival. 
Passing the Red Dog Saloon, he spots on the porch a group of men reclining in their rocking chairs against the wall or standing in their high-heeled boots and sombreros. He'd already seen three of them at the Sunny Southwest Saloon earlier in the morning. He'd even heard their names: brothers Al, Ed and John Jennings. They were teasing him about his white sombrero. They recognized him too. They greeted him mockingly:
-Hey, Temple, how's it going?
He watches them closely as he passes them. The guys are up to something, he says to himself. He thinks they look like giggling schoolchildren about to unleash a snowball bombshell. They're nudging each other, whispering, with an air of secret mischief in the making.
They're getting ready to offer me a little initiation ritual, he says to himself, his eye attentive. He's not sure, but from what he's been able to gather from his arrival in the game room about them, they're the guys who settled the score with journalist La Salle. Maybe they didn't do it themselves, but they know more than enough. All mouths closed like oysters when he asked his question. 
The grim, grimacing faces of the three men on the saloon porch remind him of the snarling muzzles and fangs of wolves in a pack. 
He has no time for further questions. He hears a hiss just above his scalp. His white sombrero twirls in the street dust. 
Dirty dogs, he mutters. He strolls unhurriedly over to where the white hat rests in the dust. He bends casually with his back to the group on the saloon porch, picks up his hat, examines it and pulls his handkerchief from his pocket. At the same time, the porch is crowded and jostling. Rocking chairs leap forward, heels click, a door closes. The owner in the white apron, who had been standing idly in the doorway with tray in hand, vanishes as if absorbed by the gloom. Of the group, only the three Jennings brothers remain. One of them, whose first name he has even remembered, Al, is leaning insolently against a porch column, the second stands wearily behind him, and the third cautiously creeps toward the closed door. Nothing tells Houston who fired the shot that sent his hat flying. 
Now half-turned towards them, the Texan takes his fine white handkerchief from his pocket, undoes its ample folds with a gesture of elegant nonchalance and, hat in hand, shakes the dust from his headgear. Having done so, he inspects it with a critical eye, finding it not too shabby, given his recent experience, except for those two round holes that have been pierced, back and front, through the top of his crown. He now places it on his head with an almost languorous gesture, throws the thin handkerchief into the street, and almost with the same gesture, quick as lightning, his hand goes to his hip. We hear the crack of a gunshot. The man sneaking toward the door slaps his hand to his ear, pulls it away and looks at it, bloodstained. 
Houston still stands motionless in the street, his hand on his hip, one foot, in his thin, high-heeled Texan boot, carelessly advanced. His massive head is lowered, menacing. 
His eyes, steel-gray beneath the edge of the white sombrero, are terrible eyes, pitiless, cold, hypnotic. 
-Having fun, Al? 
-Can't you take a joke, Temple? whines one of the three, his eyes on the hand in which Houston holds his revolver.
- Joke - you bet he is, grumbles the man who's been scarred. His hand is pressed to his ear. God help you, Temple.
-He always has, replies Houston, in a pious tone.
The Texan makes a slight movement with the hand that holds his revolver. Eyes bulging, the three men let out a cry of pure fright and flee into the saloon.
 

 
 











4

 
Woodward, July 1965

 I booked a single seat in tourist class. I can't afford one of the cabins that the line is famous for and that every traveler aboard an Atcheson, Topeka & Santa Fe train dreams of: a double living room with a folding wall in between, so that when it's open, you're in a real apartment with two tiny bathrooms and bedrooms with sofas that can be converted into beds and beds that can be folded out of the walls, onto which you climb by a little ladder. I had just enough time to catch a glimpse of one or two of them, through their open doors onto the corridor, after climbing aboard. The walls and ceilings are steel, painted pale green, and the floor is carpeted. A small button embedded in the wall allows you to call the porter.
I dream that black porters in white livery, with deep voices and elegant manners, bring me newspapers, drinks and cigarettes, and take care of me. Am I not the Stranger on a train, and therefore by necessity someone very important and no doubt very rich? 
Early this morning, as soon as the El Capitan train pulled into the station, I set foot on the little stool the conductor had placed at the bottom of the staircase. I climbed between the steel walls to the Pullman's upper deck. The air-conditioned interior smelled of leather and clean carpets. The train left the small station, very slowly. It sounded like a ship leaving port. 
I have a window seat and, it seems, the whole carriage to myself, with a few other travelers' heads, sometimes bald, emerging from the backs of their chairs, far ahead. Perhaps one of these skulls is Alfred Hitchcock's… There's plenty of space between each chair for me to stretch out on mine, with its fold-out leg support, to my full length.
As the train pulls away from the city, I think one last time of the Woodward Daily Press and its noisy print shop, reeking of an air mixed with the stench of ink, benzine and human sweat, with the big sliding iron door always open to the street, from which the oven wind blows in summer, making the atmosphere of the workshop stifling, and the blizzard blowing snow clouds in winter. 
Temple Houston had founded this newspaper, to which he had given the name Woodward News - a name later taken up by the group that bought the Woodward Daily Press. During his time, the printed press was as revolutionary as today's information technology and Internet. In some way, Temple Lea Houston was a precursor of Silicon Valley. 
The two boxes he brought with him to Woodward contained a small hand press, two six-column forms, the case rack with the type (cardboard was tacked snugly over this to keep the type from escaping), rollers, a stock of paper, a can of printer's ink, tubes of job ink, a box of wooden coins used in locking the forms. The two six-column forms had to be inked with a hand roller. Over this was placed the damp piece of white print paper. Each sheet was done by hand. 
The first issue of the Woodward News numbered four hundred and fifty copies. Houston and his wife later bought a linotype machine, the first of its kind in Oklahoma. When I took my part-time job at the Woodward Daily Press, it had two linotypes, costly machines which impressed me with their long spider-looking arm reach down with leasurly assurance to snatch a handful of metal which it carried over the operator's head, descended, dropped it. It opened its capacious maw to be fed with solidified silvery lead bars called salmons in typographers' slang, which it spat again in the shape of cakes of type. Its keys were like grinning teeth. It grunted, shivered, clumped, spoke - nearly. In 1964, no one could imagine that electronic means - photocomposition and offset - would soon make traditional typography obsolete. They in turn would disappear with the advent of the Internet. 
  
The tump and rattle of the iron monstrers could be heard during the entire day. It chattered and chittered and clanked in the composing room of the Woodward Daily Press just as it had in that of the Woodward News, its ancestor. 
The mixed odor of hot metal, printer's ink, dust, paper, acid and human sweat filled the printing shop. I never quite got used to it. Yet, among my multiple tasks, one in particular intrigued me. In a corner of the printing shop was a small stony container where liquid lead was  kept in a constant melting state. From that container my job was to fill  a recipient forming the salmon bars once they had cooled down. Before filling the recipient, I had to add some antimony powder to speed up the liquid lead's solidification. In the liquid metal of the crate's red, blue and golden reflections, I sometimes had the impression of seeing a bloody and disheveled figure appear between them like an apparition from the Graal Quest. In the very heart of the land of modernity, it was as if I had been transported into a kind of medieval fairyland.
The slow transformation of molten lead into solid bars and these bars, once hooked to the linotypes and molted again, were injected on the copper matrices of the printing characters before they were sent to the forms. This process fascinated me. Blind matter was transformed into letters which would then produce columns of text, and this text, once printed, would disseminate its meaning over the entire county. Each day the same process was repeated. 
I had dreamt that Temple Lea Houston had summoned me to do some overtime at the Woodward News to help him print Jack La Salle's Journal, The New Day, a copy of which he intended to distribute to the townspeople.  We printed fifteen thousand copies of it, enough to send to the entire county's population and beyond.
--We're going to set fire to Main Street with this paper, said Houston.
For the atomist and materialist philosophers, from Democritus and Epicurus to Carl Marx, thought is nothing but matter becoming conscious of itself. If there should be a confirmation of this thesis, then no doubt that the Woodward Daily Press's printing shop would offer a primer. With this difference that in the newspaper business, thought is, more often than not, turning into matter.














  

 




 
 Beyond the window, nothing.
The barren lunar whiteness of the rolling plain, the bushes rolling endlessly in the wind. 
All around me, the same bizarre horizon, tenacious, unheimlich, crushed between emptiness, sun and boredom. We're crossing the planet's largest garbage dump. 
In the distance, on a mesa, I seem to see a tiny silhouette observing our passage through binoculars.
How much longer before we arrive - one day? Two days? This journey across the planet's first no-man's-land, this journey to the end of nowhere, is becoming increasingly unbearable. The ocean seems warm and cordial by comparison.
I can't help staring out the window. I can't take my eyes off the ochre-grey earth, cut by small ravines and shallow, dry arroyos. You'd be hard-pressed to find a trickle of water among these rivers of pebbles. The wind stirs up miniature tornadoes of dust on the dry earth. In the distance, I can see farmhouses with their windmills and corrugated iron roofs. 
The plain radiates an unhealthy, cruel heat. On either side of the train, there's nothing on the horizon but a few broken tree skeletons, the bleached bark of trunks, stumps gesticulating grotesquely against the blue sky and intense sun. Disheveled bushes, uprooted and blown by the wind, roll endlessly, like grotesque severed heads.
 

 




It's hard to believe that this savagery was populated in an hour, says Yancy Cravat, alias Temple Lea Houston when he first visits it. He sees towns by the thousands having sprung up from this arid land overnight, where the day before there was only this plain, coyotes, rattlesnakes, red clay, brush and, now and then, a vulture's nest hidden in the safety of a clump of weeds.
It had taken God six days to create heaven and earth. This country took barely one. History had been written here in an hour, he thinks.
Beyond the window, I look out over the vast, bleak plain. For thousands of years, successive cultures of indigenous peoples had inhabited these plains, around and beyond the North Canadian River. By the 17th and 18th centuries, these Plains tribes had adopted the horse, imported by Spanish settlers, which greatly increased their mobility as nomadic hunters. 
The young Cravat lawyer had taken up the cause of the Indians. He had faced powerful opposing interest groups. And his defense of a notorious city prostitute, his brilliant advocacy, had secured his fame. 
A chaotic jolt of the train suddenly shakes me. All this travel in the past has wetted my appetite. A boy passes by, ringing his bell to announce the first service. Yes, this Western journey through space and time has made me hungry. I get up and head for the dining car.

 









This is the most fantastic restaurant I've ever seen. The maître d'hôtel who greets me and leads me to my table, menu in hand, is wearing a tuxedo. The waiters, other elegant black guys, have the whitest, freshest uniforms and doilies. The tablecloths are white and freshly pressed, too. The shimmering silverware weighs its weight in metal. So do the plates and glasses. Everything clatters and tinkles in the rumble of the train, but with a kind of elegant, classy manner.
My waiter places the dishes in front of me with the dexterity of a maestro. If I still want ice water, he pours it for me at the very moment I express my desire, and the way he pours it is a work of art. It's impossible to imagine him spraying a drop, no matter how much the train jolts. To serve me any beer at all, he has to follow a protocol of no less than thirty-nine points, from the way he cools the rim of the glass in ice at the bar, to the way he pours the beer into it, after placing the glass on a doily in front of me, in my place. With a napkin on his wrist, he tilts the bottle and pours the liquid into the glass with the ceremony of a mass officiant.








The menu immediately makes me forget the aridity outside. For my first meal I order sautéed Rocky Mountain trout with bacon, spring chicken fried Southern style, a plate of soup, roasted sirloin steak, potato gratin, fresh vegetables, tomato salad with French dressing and a choice of desserts. I finish with hot brioches and coffee. All for a very reasonable price, and well within my student budget. 



5


 Beyond the window, in the distance, the plain slumbers under a blanket of golden light. I see the profusion of soft grays and reds, pale golds and russets of desert vegetation - sage, mule grass, sheaf plants and buckwheat, with here and there a strangely gesticulating Joshua tree, its bark rough or stuffed with dry thorns, and hued at the end of its many folded arms by thick clusters of metallic-green spikes.
Here and there, a clump of shrubs rises up from ground-level slabs. Over there, against the backdrop of the enormous plain, the sun shines on the steep, jagged buttes that rise inexplicably from the earth like islands. They glisten as if from their own incandescence. They resemble crouching animals, half rats, half lizards. Sometimes, these saurians seem to stir in their stony sleep. They seem to be approaching, attempting a maneuver of encirclement or intimidation. 
Mile after mile, as far as the eye can see, the skeletons of oil-well masts loom against the sky like giant Martian creatures lying in wait across the landscape. I see a tiny figure galloping across the windswept expanse. The ragged rider is riding one of those great gray lizards. Swirls of dust rise from behind the animal's two alert legs. The rider climbs the side of a mound and immobilizes his lizard with a flick of his reins. Raising his goggles, he takes a pair of binoculars from his saddlebag and observes the train.










  In the distance, three oil derricks rise to the top of a mesa. They look like a modern-day Golgotha, sturdy and efficient. 
 












6
 

On either side of the railroad track, two horrible stretches of arid land, as if charred beneath their saline coating and plastered here and there with reddish streaks. An occasional bittern, ridiculously flapping its wings, takes to the air. Under the gusts of wind, swirls of sand rise up like great shrouds, then fall back onto the deserted, hilly plain. We're at sea - there's no other way to describe this plain, as Stevenson spoke of the great plains. 
In fact, I feel as if I were wandering at the bottom of an ocean. Settled under the Pleasure Dome of the panoramic wagon, I fall asleep. I'm dreaming. This trepidation of the axles has always been more or less creative of phantasmagoria. Soon I'm wandering through the ruins of a sunken city. My progress is slow, as my feet sink into a kind of humus and slimy mixed with clay and dotted with flat stones. I trudge on, careful not to slip, through a stony maze of broken column shafts, stones and wall sections, passing under arches and porticoes, at the foot of pyramids, mausoleums and aqueducts. 
The ground becomes rocky. I have a glimpse of the dismantled ramparts of a city, covered with millions of crustaceans and a jumble of algae. Here, the still intact arches of a portico; there, two or three columns lying under their bedrock; further on, a succession of arches that must have supported the pipes of an aqueduct; elsewhere, the collapsed pillars of a gigantic bridge, engaged in the thickness of the groove.
In this sunken Carthago, you can see the site of a temple, a forum, the foundations of a palace and the plateau of a citadel. All dominated by a central mountain fifteen hundred feet high. A vast circuit, where ancient Rome would have stood ten times over!
A procession of strange suspended animalcules with a thousand tentacles, miriapods with metallic legs and phosphorescent eyes, emerges from the ruins of a large temple between massive sculptures of human figures.  
In the distance, I have a glimpse of an underwater city of large glass bubbles, growing ever more distinct. I approach the strange art nouveau complex. I move magically through the membranes of one of the bubbles, which closes behind me. 
Little electric fish swim around me like movie stars. 
Suddenly, a jolt from the train wakes me up.
 
  












7
 

Slowly, I emerge from my drowsiness. My arrow-holed brain, a hatch floating on the sea of discomfiture, reflects the bitterness of this emptiness through the seven holes in my head. Next to me, on the bench, now lies not Edna Ferber's novel but a sample of The New Day, Jack La Salle's newspaper.
Reddish, tawny patches on the plain widen out more and more, rising slowly in gullied plateaus to the rigid barrier of jagged mountains, tawny rocks, among them the Aquarius range that I can see from my window: the gigantic ledges of six extinct volcanoes that you feel you can touch with your hand and, in the middle, dominating them with its vertiginous ridges, the clearly visible Mount Xanadu.
Gradually, the vegetation has disappeared. It has given way to a surly growth of sparse cacti, candelabra shrubs and dusty succulents. Not a human, not an animal, not a plant. Quite a successful desolation.
Why has the train stopped? I feel the need to stretch my legs. I go out for a few steps along the track. I see a small station with a name painted in white letters on the water tower: CALICO JUNCTION.
An inscription at the entrance to the station informs me that I'm 4,500 feet above sea level.
There are ruined shacks behind the station, the remains of a ghost town. How long will this stop last?
-An hour or two, it depends, says the mechanic. We're having mechanical problems with the Warbonnet diesel engine. It needs repair.
-Does that give me enough time to take a walk?
-Plenty of time. But don't stray too far or lose sight of us, mister, if you don't mind my saying so. The area is notoriously unsafe.
-What's that supposed to mean?
-Don't you read the papers?
-Please, what do you mean by unsafe?
The mechanic shows me the Aquarius mountain range, with its six cones of extinct volcanoes in the distance and, in the middle, Mount Xanadu.
-I mean, we've had reports of activists lurking along the mountain trails there. Actually, we're not sure. Some say they're national guards or special troops tasked with guarding a top-secret military base. In any case, there's something funny going on over there, I tell you…
I laugh. At first glance, it's as if the chain were a hundred miles away.
-I doubt very much I could get there and back in two hours. I'll wisely stay in town. Maybe there's a saloon open. 
Then I head for the ghost town, trudging along a dusty path among the debris of shacks. 
The sky is clear.
I take a deep gulp of dry air. I start walking through brambles, fallen rocks and ravines towards what was once a town, with houses, casinos, streets. There's nothing left, no shouts, no rumblings, no distant rumors. 
I'm alone now. I listen for imperceptible, absent noises: the last creaks of burnt fences, ash or dust in a crack, a stone detaching itself from the shattered facade of a monumental building, tumbling, bouncing from crevice to cornice and rolling on the ground among other stones. 
Interlocking wagon wheels, rusty rims, abandoned car bodies, their skeletons stripped and rotting, their headlights staring skyward like blind eyes, bumpers torn off like fly wings, overturned trucks, loads sunk in mud, litter the edges of the runway. I cautiously cross a dry rio on a footbridge bending under my weight. On the other bank, the ghastly city rises its charred walls with blind windows, niches, shafts open to nothing: gray skies, flatness, absent rooms that have been emptied of their very ghosts, fly-infested shacks. 
In front of me, behind me, all around me, bare, blackened walls, twisted ironwork, ruined pillars, sheds that no longer have windows or doors, and whose roofs have half collapsed under the effect of the weather.
Signs nailed to tree stumps or walls: For an ambulance, call 874. Jeff Lorey, undertaker. Call Dr. Gill, 496.
Forge, mill, sawmill whistle, all civilized noises have faded, disappeared. I'm alone, walking straight ahead, at random. I wander among the unrecognizable remains of what may once have been a dwelling, a public building, a hotel, a gambling or prostitution house, a theater, a prison or a church. I think I hear the banging and clanking of a pump and a drill, insults, screams, the sound of thick dishes being piled up, the clinking of glasses, women's laughter, arguments. I'm looking for something, I don't really know what. But there's nothing in the glare, the heat, the flies and the filth. 
Nothing but these scree slopes, these corners of darkness, populated by presences I know nothing about, but which terrify me, nothing but these doors that open, close, bang together without a breeze, nothing but the glaucous lividity of the few remaining panes of glass in the windows…
On the other side of a dry creek, I can see the old abandoned station, with its useless platform. An antique steam locomotive, with a very tall chimney, has been left behind.
I enter a huge house in very poor condition, from what I can see of broken doors and collapsed walls. Sections of walls are missing in several places. Stumbling through a tangle of brambles and rotting beams, I squeeze through one of the openings into a sort of open-air warehouse where a branch line of the railroad ends. There's an unbelievable amount of junk lying around, forgotten by everyone. There are old boilers, the remains of a dismantled truck, a heap of worn tires, rusty machine parts, mountains of clinker over which scrawny weeds grow, walls of metal cans piled one on top of the other, pieces of a crane with one arm casting a menacing shadow, and unknown objects, doomed to decay, already overgrown with gigantic thistles and all manner of weeds. The ash covering the floor crunches treacherously beneath my feet. 
The room is cluttered with broken and abandoned machine parts. A few pieces of scrap metal lie in the dust on a conveyor belt immobilized in front of a shaft emptied of its molten metal. 
What if Temple Houston had been here? I'm almost tempted to call him by name: Houston?... as if his name would resurrect him. But the walls only send me back a vague, diminishing echo: Houston... Houston…
Have I spoken out loud? Perhaps I have! In any case, I can't hear the sound of my own voice. I don't dare call out his name any more, but I listen, holding my breath for the slightest sound that might betray his presence. My whole body tenses up, ready to vibrate at the slightest noise. 
I look around. But there's no one there. No noise, no distant rumors.
I begin to laugh at my own gullibility, with a kind of mute, mirthless laughter. Like a sleepwalker's laugh.
What a shame! An old hand like me, falling for mirages... I'd better get out of here.
I leave the warehouse and spot an open saloon on the other side of the log road. The sign says: To the Beast of Wuthering Heights. I enter. The dark, stuffy saloon is filled with a bewildering array of bizarre, exotic creatures and monsters lined up at the metal bar. At first, the sight is horrifying. Monocular, thousand-eyed, slimy, fur-covered, scaly, tentacled or clawed creatures elbow each other, jumbled together, over drinks. A huge rusty barman stops me.
-We don't serve foreigners here.
-I don't want a drink. I just want to know if you've seen my colleague and nonetheless friend Temple Houston…
By way of reply, I receive a tremendous punch from the barkeeper over the bar, right in the chest, sending me rolling down the street. It takes me a while to get back on my feet and walk away. 
I climb a fence, the exposed nails of which cruelly scrape my knee. Blood drips onto my shoe, but I don't notice a thing. When, to my amazement, an inscription on the fence stops me:
Jack La Salle was here
My head spins, I don't know what to think, I don't know anymore.
Behind the building, a steep path leads to the top of a cliff. I start to climb between the rocks.
For a moment, I hesitate to return to the train. But an irresistible curiosity drives me on and, as if drained by some evil vacuum cleaner, I keep on climbing. 

 

8
 

For two hours I walk among skeletal rocks, among bleak peaks frozen in the middle of this dark desert ocean. The earth looks like ash. The mountain is bare and covered with tiny thorns. Here, the bleached skull of a steer, there, the carcass of a horse carefully cleaned by vultures, the desert garbage collectors and bleached, abandoned under the blazing sun. I advance through a gigantic chaos of black rocks, in a formidable field of mystery and death. The landscape, so solemn as a cataclysm, is so devastated that it has become lunar, the only sound being that of stones rolling beneath my feet and falling like detonations to the bottom of the precipices.
Not a human being left! What a bizarre universe I've been walking through! 
I feel as if I've lost my gravity, become my double, my replica, my ghost. My shadow has faded, disappeared. Better not to doze off in this place. 
It's a strange trip, really. Houston nor anyone else will ever believe me. But no matter. Under the scorching sun, the rock glows red and looks like it's about to burst. At each stony bolt, I can hope, having passed it, to find behind it a little greenery, a little water, something less tragic and desolate. Perpetual voyage of Sisyphus! Each time, my expectations are disappointed. 
It's very hot, as if inside a copper can. My eyes hurt. Yet, from that moment on, my mind is made up: I'm not going back to the train - which may well have already left, anyway. In fact, I don't know how long it's been since my watch stopped. I've lost all sense of orientation in space and time. And then, in such a vast expanse, what wonder if you lose all sense of distance and proportion? 
The smell of asphalt increases. It's like being on the road to Gomorrah. I can see the most curious specimens of volcanic rock around me. The rocks look like large blocks of charcoal, chunks of pink granite; elsewhere, the granite is veined like marble. But I have no taste for geology at the moment. I'm indifferent to all this phantasmagoria.
In this atmosphere of paradox, I expect just about anything. I'd be no more surprised than that to see any fabulous animal, unicorn, oepiornyx, hippogriff, android or tetrapod unearthed. I continue to progress under these extravagant skies, skirting the bottom of a dry arroyo through the tierra reticulado. I feel as if I'm walking through a burnt-out, cursed city, among the scrawny shrubs that have sprung up haphazardly in this unforgiving desert. 
This black, grey and yellow chaos is the first time I've crossed it. I'm sure of it. And yet, I seem to have wandered here before, in thought or dream. The brambles of the bushes hold me back as I pass, clinging like hands to my clothes. 
While the sun is already chipping its last arrows on the granite of the surrounding mountains, I reach a gloomy amphitheatre of gaunt rock at the foot of a black mountain, its jagged peaks looming six thousand feet above my head. It's a kind of formidable rocky chaos, a huge, gloomy fortress, with ridges like feudal dungeons, silhouetted with incredible precision against the purple-tinted sky. It rises, craggy and black, among the bleak frozen peaks of this dark desert ocean, at the center of all the surrounding gloomy rockery. It must be Mount Xanadu.
Lizards flee among the scree. A remnant of light lingers, transforming the great towers, the fortress, into nightmarish monuments, a remnant of light more livid, more anguished, more spectral than the darkness... A frightful species of scaly quadruped, half iguana, half boar, watch my passage with their glassy eyes, sitting as if at a window in the holes of the rocks I pass. And snakes as if it were raining, of course, some fleeing into the thickets, others, like ugly black eels, asleep on the cracked banks of dry arroyos. What a tragic impression of cataclysm and solitude! I decide to stop.
There's a well here, with a few trees, the first I've come across since leaving Calico Junction. Strange noises, in the rapidly falling twilight, are just beginning to emerge around me. Cracking noises, followed by long, wrenching wails, echo indefinitely in the surrounding canyons. The whole mountain seems to be groaning.
I feel like I see the Colossi of Memnon, looking like cosmonauts stranded on the bleak plain, still strapped to their ejector seats. In their flanks, the overheated rocks, the cracking of stones, a whole range of physical phenomena now deafen me... the unexpected concert painfully affects my raw nerves. 
As the first stars begin to pierce the soft blue velvet sky, the strange concert ceases. I can see the tiny, pale flames lighting up one after the other. The moon has just risen, full and bright and round, and it casts a cold metallic light over the large blocks of lava rounded and polished by erosion. Wandering through a web of russet clouds, it sweeps at brief intervals over the bald ridges of the mountains.
I'm all alone. The mocking stars laugh at me. Above my head, in the immemorial light of the rising moon, under a sky whose hue is turning to livid green, the gigantic rocky needles, at this hour colored in gold, indigo, lilac and cinnabar, stand out against a wine-red sky. Above them, with great, silent rustles of their wings, mute guardians of this monstrous apocalypse, starry bitterns fly by again and again. 
The mountain ridge gradually darkens. It resembles some forgotten, age-old fortress, raised from the depths of the oceans, yet already resigned to its imminent engulfment.
A horrible feeling of abandonment has taken hold of me, and I can do nothing to combat my anguish.
Night has fallen. The moon floods the mountains with a russet glow. I pick up a match and light a bunch of grass on fire. The smoke blinds me for a moment. A sparkling light now comes from the flaming grass. The inferno flares ever higher and brighter.
My hand touches something in the grass that hasn't yet been consumed. It feels fresh and strange. It's a little button, soft to the touch, shaped like a carrot. I grab it, examine it carefully and put it in my mouth. It tastes good. Then I throw it into the fire with a great discordant laugh. Peyote, eh! Peyote. I've just found a peyote plant!
The fire fades, the flame goes out. I've never laughed as much as I did tonight. I taste another button.
I have visions.
There are two, three, four men around me. No, five, six, eight... A whole regiment. Where did they come from? They must have been hiding behind the rocks, spying on me. I might as well be cooperative, in case the park police came to arrest me. I've always been very polite to the constabulary. To be on the safe side, I take out my press card. You see, gentlemen, I'm a fully accredited journalist. I'm an honorable citizen, who aspires only to work for the economic prosperity of his country. I'm reporting on nothing. Yes, I am, commissioned by my editor-in-chief, Temple Lea Houston himself. Special correspondent for the Woodward News in the middle of Nowhere. Am I not the chronicler of the impossible? I've always dreamed of reporting on nothing. Where nothing will have happened... but the place. In other words, about a non-place, an ou-topos, an utopia. By the way, have you seen my friend Houston around?... Temple Lea Houston... Here, have some peyote. No, there's no risk of addiction. Please, take some more. 
Someone pounces on me and, before I can utter a cry, forces a gag into my mouth. It's an ambush, for sure. My hands are tied behind my back, I'm lifted from under my arms and carried away. I'm hoisted and lashed onto the back of a mule. And no way to warn Houston with my cell phone. My captors took it away from me. What a job, really. Can't wait to retire!
Only a few screams. Muffled horse neighs. It's a good thing they tied me up, otherwise I'd be tumbling all over the place. These agents are good people. But what a long trail... Where have I got myself into this time? 
I'd like to lie down. To sleep! If only I could sleep! We must be going through a long canyon. I think I see Indiana Jones and Pancho Villa at every fork in the road. And then the open plain again. And the stars... Will this ridiculous race last much longer? And what a way to treat a distinguished representative of the press! These troopers are certainly good people, but they have no sense of public relations. Surely, neither La Salle nor Houston could have followed such a trail.
More yellow, more indifferent than ever, the moon sticks to the transparent globe of the night, and seems to increase the fatigue that spreads through my whole body. I sink into a kind of woozy drowsiness. I see lights... maybe they're stars. 
I feel myself being taken up a dark staircase. A staircase in the rock, but a staircase nonetheless. I begin to count the countless steps. Our climb becomes more and more painful. How long have we been climbing this slope? I confess I have no idea. But it's not a mule carrying me now, it's a man. An Indian. An Ute. A true Lamanite, from the lost tribe of Israel.
He wears old pants, a mink-fur cap on his head, precious moccasin shoes adorned with white and gray beads. A red scarf is tied around his bare neck. I hope he doesn't drop me on this never-ending staircase. That would be a dirty joke. 
Something's shining on the ceiling. Yes, it's a night-light. Another one. We follow a number of corridors, lit from far and wide by silver torches. We must be walking through the maze of a necropolis. Then, once again, we see nothing. But I don't care. I'm lying down now, so I can get some sleep. Ah, gentlemen, there's no need to tie me up, I have no intention of touring the parks. I just came to check on my friend Houston.
Then darkness again. Footsteps recede. By the horns of Beelzebub, am I in Xanadu at last, yes or no?
 

 































II - The Desert woman 








1 

 
Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew 
Undid me.
T. S. Eliot, The Waste Land, III. The Fire Sermon, v. 293 
 
Where am I?
I open my eyes. I see myself lying on a layer of straw. Pale aquarium light streams into the room through a large bay window. They didn't tie me up properly. I sit up. I feel that I have a body, and that this body has just been through an immense ordeal. I manage to free myself from my bonds with ease. The ideas I'm trying to gather jingle like bells in my empty, drowsy head. I stagger to my feet. My head is so heavy that I feel as if I had a huge lead ball rolling around inside my skull instead of a brain. I couldn't feel in worse shape if I'd spent the whole night smoking and drinking. I wipe my forehead with my hand. Where am I?
I look around. I rub my eyes. Am I still dreaming?
I'm in a circular room carved into the rock, shaped like a geodesic dome, about fifty feet in diameter and about the same height. Strange signs are carved into the smooth walls. This is certainly not the work of nineteenth-century miners. The room is lit by a huge bay opening onto a deep azure sky. 
The floor, the curved walls and the ceiling are made of a kind of veined marble like porphyry and an unusual crystal, rhodochrosite, found in various parts of the world in shades of pink and dark red.
Staggering, I walk towards the opening, attracted by the light that erases my dreams, and lean over the balustrade. 
I can't repress a cry of astonishment.
I lean back and don't move. I thought I wasn't prone to vertigo. I'm not so sure any more when I look at the panorama. It's worth the effort. I'm on a sort of balcony, overlooking the vertiginous void, at the edge of a monstrous sheer drop, carved into the side of the white porphyry mountain and onto whose ledge I've just ventured. It seems to me that I must have a bit of a fever. 
The immense, monotonous panorama stretches endlessly before me. A frightening abyss. Above, the azure skies. At the foot of the cliff, a great naphtha rio, glittering like a steel-scaled snake, winds through the sands. I recognize it: it's the Rio del Sangre Real, well known to visitors to Xanadu.
Towards the desert, like a succession of beaches, immense parallel waves of ash-blond extend one behind the other in a continuous ascent. Then, beyond the sands, far away, the chain of the Aquarius Mountains forms a chalk-colored wall, slightly veiled by a purple haze. In the opposite direction, the sun rises. 
After the long claustration I've just endured, I'm as if dazzled by all this fresh light. My legs barely support me. Thousands of golden atoms dance before my eyes.
I contemplate the astonishing landscape. The sun rises into the sky, casting immense blue shadows across the mountainside. Golden skies, reddish gleams above the majestic, evil Aquarius mountain range. This is the moment when the wretched Faust tremblingly calls out to Mephistopheles: Look, look! The mountain walls burst into flames. 




 
 
 

 
 



2
 
If all these books conform to the Koran, then they are useless. If they do not, they are dangerous.
Muslim general Al-as Amrou, occupying Alexandria in the 7th century.

I return to the room. I hadn't seen before its enormous Gothic architecture, with arches and dark pillars. Its cross-beamed nave is indeed a nave, in the etymological sense of the word, giving it the air of an upturned frigate. On the walls hang indiscriminate panoplies: coats of mail, battle-axes, round shields and helmets with their long, slender points. In a display case, a ciborium sits alongside, on the same shelf, delicately chiselled Sienese daggers.
A slightly Jesuit-style chapel in the middle of the Wild West has been rebuilt from the rock. An admirable ogival hall intersects at right angles with the rooms of honor and armor. The door on the left leads into the armoury. It looks like the architectural work of a madman, in the style of William Randolph Hearst's San Simeon Castle - isn't the home of the hero of Orson Welles' Citizen Kane called Xanadu? 
The library is entered through the door at the back of the main hall. Superbly bound volumes rise to the ceiling, lining three of the vast room's walls. In the middle, an immense display case, with the most curious samples of numismatics. Five or six lecterns have been transformed into rolling desks, very practical for work. A large set of electric lights makes research very convenient. In fact, the room is so dark that it's impossible to read or write without this aid.
Through a half-open panel in the fourth wall, I can see shelves filled with books and priceless manuscripts. In the middle is a table covered with an incredible pile of papers, magazines and books.
I pick up a few sheets of paper spread across the table. They are covered with characters unknown to me.
At the same moment, a grumbling voice echoes through the immense room.
-You seem very curious, sir.
I turn to the newcomer.



3
 

What the hell are you talking about?
Philip K. Dick, Valis (1981)

Standing in one of the doorways, a little old man stares at me with the attention of a bacteriological researcher scrutinizing a specimen through a microscope. His bald, polished head seems to have been corroded by the most virulent of acids. He has a yellow, angular face, half-hidden by a huge pair of green glasses, with a small gray beard. A long, yellowed smock, covered in chemical stains, envelops him from head to toe.
From the partially open door comes the sound of stoves roaring like chimney fires.
He picks up the sheets that, in my surprise, I've dropped on the floor, counts them, sorts them again and looks at me with the suspicious air of a scientist who always thinks something is going to be stolen. Sitting down in front of the table, he starts flipping through his papers furiously.
I don't know why, but at that moment a mad exasperation seizes me. I walk towards him.
-Listen, sir, I tell him, I don't know where I am nor who you are.
He looks at me with disdainful surprise: 
-Who am I? Let me introduce myself: My name is Sax. Doctor Ted Sax. I'm the chemist and documentalist at the Xanadu Research Center. I spend half my time in my laboratory, surrounded by stoves and retorts, doing genomic experiments, and the other half among the manuscripts in this library. I was working on a decisive experiment in my lab when I heard you coming.
- Where the hell am I?
-You want to know where you are? All you have to do is take a look at these few books, he says dismissively. He pushes a button in the wall. A cupboard appears, filled with books. In turn, he opens five, ten, twenty other cupboards. A prodigious library, even larger than the first, spreads out before my eyes.
-These are the secret documents of the Xanadu Research Center: When the Library of Alexandria, created from scratch by Ptolemy I in 290 BC, was burnt down in 391 AD on the orders of the Emperor Theodosius and the Patriarch of Alexandria Theophilus, a devout fundamentalist avant la lettre, several hundred thousand papyrus scrolls, parchments and codices of works declared pagan, i.e. not conforming to the newly established principles of Christianity, went up in smoke. Only biblical and ecclesiastical writings remained. Three centuries later, the Muslim general Al-as Amrou, occupying Alexandria, decided to destroy the rest of the documents. Why this auto da fe? If all these books conform to the Koran, then they're useless, he says. If they do not, then they are dangerous. These dangerous books nonetheless have ruled the Mediterranean world for seven centuries. 
-Am I witnessing the rehearsal of a Hollywood peplum? What do you expect me to do with all this junk? I want to know where I am. That's all I want to know. 
-Where you are? As close to hell as you could hope to get. I told you: you're in the most fabulous library of all time, no more, no less. 
- You can't expect me to believe that these old Byzantine parchments just happened to be here by chance in the middle of the American desert. No one would believe you.
- These manuscripts, which the scientific world thought had disappeared forever, were discovered by a young archaeologist, my colleague Zacatecan Jones, who was personally investigating the disappearance of the French ship La Belle, aboard which the famous explorer François Cavelier de La Salle, who discovered the mouth of the Mississippi in the 17th century, ran aground with his crew on the shores of the Gulf of Mexico.
-Every student in our public schools knows this episode from the early American history, I say. What does it have to do with the lost library of Alexandria?
-After long and tedious research, my colleague Jones established that La Belle contained in her holds a cargo that a Spanish commando had managed to steal after the massacre of de La Salle, who had been ambushed by his own men. The commando transported the precious cargo here, to Xanadu, which at the time served as their hideout in their fight against the French in Louisiana…
-... just as you use it as a hideout today, no doubt.
- Let's just say that when we arrived here to set up our research center, we in turn discovered this fabulous treasure, which the whole world thought had disappeared. On the orders of our boss, Norea, I immediately set about restoring them. 
-Nomenclature, nomenclature... all this amorrean, palmyrenian, nabatean nonsense, which only a madman would dare to unravel, all this smoke is just nomenclature! 
-These nomenclatures, as you call them with the disdain and foolish self-assurance of your Western ignorance, young man, these great traditions of the ancient Near East that inspired Solon, Herodotus and Plato, could well affect the daily lives of your readers without their knowledge. After all, weren't these texts, described by the early councils as apocryphal, actually the bestsellers, comic strips and pop literature of the Middle Ages? Would Dante have conceived his Divine Comedy, that space opera, without them? The writers of the Arthurian cycle, which already contains all of Star Wars, made them the backbone of their epic. The great masters of the Renaissance drew their inspiration from it. And don't they influence so many of today's science-fiction authors and best-selling novelists? From T. S. Eliot to Jack Kerouac and the Beat generation, from Indiana Jones, uncle of our colleague Zacatecan Jones, to Star Wars, from George Lucas to Monthy Python to Star Treck and through social networks, video games and role-playing games, don't they control the fantasies of our contemporaries and their dreams of ancient meanderings ? Aren't they resurfacing today in what Jung, who drew extensively on their repertoire, called the collective unconscious? 
--Are you going to tell me what I'm doing here at last?
-In fact, it won't be long before you get to know our Virgo-virago. Norea, Miss Norea Hamilton is the director of our center. Please be patient. For now, a few last words about this library. Another colleague of mine, Ted Nelson, author of the Xanadu project, the forerunner of the World Wide Web, has generously offered to put this university of the Hellenistic world online, integrating it into a single deductive, object-oriented database, a new generic structure inference system he has christened the Xanadu II project which soon will be available on a single usb card, thanks to our natural language processing assistants.
- I couldn't care less about your frenetic structure-ingerence system! Are you going to explain to me what all this means?
-What it all means? Thanks to the computer, this collection will finally fulfill the wish of Demetrios of Pharos, the Platonic scholar appointed by Ptolemy I for this very purpose: to gather all the books of the world in one place, as in Alexandria. Transforming the world into a single, vast book, accessible to all, except that in our lab it will be available to all on a single disquette. That's what it means, sir. The Web, Wikipedia, the mass media and the social networks are still in their infancy by comparison. In the meantime, take a look at this document.
From a nearby shelf, Dr. Sax picks up a book covered in a gray glossy cover.
-What's this book, I ask.
-This book, replies the professor slowly, weighing his words, this book is our most precious document, it's the greatest, the most beautiful, the most perfect, the truest and the most hermetic of Plato's dialogues, it's the second part of the Critias or Atlantis, which we thought was lost. But here the Critias is complete. This manuscript was discovered in the famous Gnostic library of Nag Hammadi, in higher Egypt, in 1945. As a precaution, as with the rest of our most important documents, we have made a holographic version. The copy I'm holding is the original. You can check it.
He removes the book from its cloth and hands it to me. In fact, it's a very old codex, a pile of parchments wrapped in a leather sheath, which I open carefully. Encountering this opuscule in the middle of the Wild West, I'm as surprised as a Jesuit would have been to discover a bona fide argument in Pascal’s Provinciales. 
As I leaf through the manuscript, I ask:
-How did this codex, which appears to be complete, get here?
-How did it get here? 
And he tells me this story:
-Plato, a trainee journalist at The Voice of Callipolis, a far right-wing tabloïd published in Lacedemonia under the sponsorship of a quarteron of spoiled retired generals, writes the second part of Critias during his stay as his paper's special envoy in Syracuse, under the instructions of Denys, the city's tyrant who wants a model constitution for his government. But Denys, a real brute, doesn't even bother to read the journalist's final text, dismissing him with immediate effect, without notice or explanation. Without even signing a work certificate. On his way back to Athens to register for unemployment, Plato is captured by pirates. In a public square on an Aegean island occupied by a tourist vacation village, he is about to be auctioned off as a kitchen boy. The author of a famous cookery manual, The Banquet, and of precepts on the art of cutting up a chicken, which are still taught today, he has solid culinary credentials. His life doesn't weigh much when an Athenian businessman friend of his, passing by chance on his yacht, recognizes him and buys him for a few drachmas. 
-Life hasn't always been easy for journalists. Even if I'm not a specialist in the art of cutting up a chicken, I think I can speak from experience…
- But back to the apocryphal Critias. During Plato and his savior's stopover in Alexandria, the manuscript is intercepted by the port authorities, who have been instructed to seize all books passing through the port in order to enrich the municipal library. The text falls into the hands of the famous Gnostic doctor Faust. One of Faust's most brilliant students is Augustine, the future Saint Augustine. He accuses his teacher of heresy for having given credence to what he considers a crude forgery of Plato's work. In his Contra Faustum, he does not hesitate to denounce the Gnostic doctor as a subversive agent in the pay of the Comintern. This leads to his consecration as a heresiologist, his canonization as a saint in the Christian Church and the elimination of his master as a competitor on the ideological front. This was common practice among the Church Fathers, many of whom were trained in the school of Gnosis.
-Brilliant pupils are often ungrateful to their masters, I say. Why was Augustine so ticklish about the pseudo-Critias? 
-In the second part of the Critias, after dismissing the Demiurge for bad service and entrusting the creation of the universe to a consortium of aliens from Sirius, the Elohim - the name of the creative power in Genesis - Plato explains that the descendants of the Elohim, the Atlanteans, the true generators of humanity in general and of the United States in particular, after their island sank, secretly resurfaced on the continent of Mû, in Australia. From there, they peregrinate stubbornly from Tasmania to Greenland, from the Tropic of Capricorn to the Tropic of Cancer, from Prince Edward Island to Svalbard. While some emigrated to the island of Avalon, the Eschavalon of Arthurian tales, others went to the Caucasus and the sources of the Indus, founded a colony in Sumer some 4,500 years ago, penetrated the central Australian desert at a time when all the continents still formed a single core that could be traversed without navigation, the marvellous Gondwana.
-All this is nonsense. Plato could not have possessed all this geographical knowledge. Not even after forty years of study. Not even by home tuition. He barely knew where to find the columns of Hercules. As for people who write books about Mû and Gondwana, I can find as many as you like.
-Plato even won the Pulitzer Prize for investigative journalism for his series of articles on Atlantean migrations in Guatemala, Honduras and Yucatan, where a pyramid bears the name Aztlan on its base. This name, says Plato, is that of Atlantis in Maya - proof that the Atlanteans were on the American continent long before the conquerors. 
- Journalists will tell you anything and everything.
-In the 14th century, however, a copy of the pseudo-Critias reached the Cluniac abbey of Glastonbury, in Devonshire, England. At the time, Glastonbury was the largest forgery workshop in Christendom. The monks claim that the manuscript was brought to them by Joseph of Arimathea, a travelling salesman fresh from Palestine, who also carried the Holy Grail in his suitcase. He deposited both objects at the abbey. The Cluniac monks immediately understood the advantages of Plato's text, which they were able to translate. But a commando of French Knights Templar, under the command of John Paul Jones, got wind of the manuscript's presence at the abbey and managed to steal it, claiming it was their rightful property.
-The Knights Templar? What have they got to do with it?
-Plato, a gifted science-fiction writer, imagines a scenario in which he anticipates the history of the religious and military order that will later conquer Palestine. He legitimizes the Knights Templar as successors to the Atlanteans, and assigns them the mission of pursuing and carrying out their ancestors' plan for world conquest. The Crusades were the first large-scale application of this plan. 
-No one will ever believe such nonsense, I say. Even my newspaper wouldn't publish it. 
-From Hassan ibn Sabbah, among the Assassins of Alamout, to the sublime Djelal-Eddin, founder of the dervishry of Konia and inspired preacher of the Metsnewi, the Knights Templar penetrated the mystical mysteries of Asia. They were expelled from the church for attempting to syncretize Christian and Muslim ideas. Compared to theirs, modern ideas are nothing but warmed-up medieval heresies. And in the Middle Ages, the Knights Templar took center stage. Today, they would be the target of CNN, Al Djezirah and the mass media. If they want to conquer the world and control it by stealth, they'd better make themselves more discreet first. And the Inquisition, by signaling their official demise, will paradoxically work in their favor. They were thought to be virtually eliminated after the Inquisitors' tribunals condemned all their members to death or exiled them for various sins, heresies and crimes. When, in 1307, King Philippe le Bel of France, fearing their growing power and on the advice of the Pope, had them arrested and executed, several of them, no doubt chosen by lot, allowed themselves to be executed without putting up any resistance. The survivors, however, regrouped in Spain, where they formed the Order of Montesa. Their organization has now become an occult one, and Cristoval Colon, alias Columbus, is one of its first 
members. When he set sail for the west and sighted the American coast, he exclaimed: See this shore, my brothers! He was convinced he had discovered the lost continent of Atlantis.
-So Columbus was an Atlantean? My American history textbook at Woodward Senior High School doesn't say...
-Columbus was both an Atlantean and a Templar. Despite their persecution in France and suppression by the Inquisition, the Templars survived in Scotland, where they used new titles. They played an important role in the peasant revolt of 1381 in England. They exerted a definite influence on Sir Francis Bacon's New Atlantis. This utopian novel inspired many later radicals and secular humanists. In Germany, in contrast to their French brethren, the Germanic branch of the Knights Templar, the Teutonic Knights, reigned unchallenged and controlled the territory they had gathered, which would later fall under the yoke of the Soviets, until at least the 15th century. Before the Second World War, the Teutonic Knights created the Germanenordern and the Thule Gesellschaft, two secret organizations that exerted great influence on Hitler and the Nazi cadres. 
-The Thule Gesellschaft? A sect descended from the Illuminati? 
-The Thule Gesellschaft was indeed an extremist extension of the Berlin Illuminati lodge, which claimed to be not only scientifically socialist, but also Freemasonic and Gnostic. This is why the Nazis, as perfect Illuminati, believed themselves divinely inspired and therefore entitled to rewrite the rules of good and evil to suit their own purposes. According to Nazi theory, the celestial bodies, the Aeons, had lived in Atlantis, where they had formed the Uranian Confederation. We can therefore deduce that the Teutonic Knights were the cause of the Second World War, and the British secret services, who made no mistake about it, tried to combat the Nazi conceptions with another, Tolkien-style fantasy, that of the Simarillion. 
-Here we are in the realm of fantasy, in the genre of the Hobbit series. No one will ever believe you.
-The Nazis did. The main danger with this kind of philosophy, apart from its belief in the divine nature of government, is of course its manichaeism, which makes you believe that your opponent opposes the will of God Himself and is therefore an agent of the Devil. But back to the members of the Thule Society...
-These, if my memory of history is correct, were quick to disapprove of the methods of Hitler and his gang - weren't the Wehrmacht officers who tried unsuccessfully to eliminate the Führer before the end of the war all members of the Thule Society?
-Yes, they were. After their arrest and execution, Hitler abolished the military order of the Teutonic Knights in 1944, as the Nazi party did not tolerate secret organizations, being itself a secret organization, with its Grand Master, racist Gnosticism, rites and initiations. However, surviving members of the order manage to hijack a U Boot from the Nazi submarine base at Saint-Nazaire and escape to the USA. On board is a young noblewoman from Marienburg, the Order's former capital. Determined to found the Fourth Reich on this side of the Atlantic, she naturalized as an American and took the name of Norea Hamilton. 
A linguist and philologist specializing in Hamito-Semitic languages, working as a researcher at the Institute for the Study of Antiquity and Christianity in Claremont, Southern California, Norea takes an active part in the institute's Gnostic library project. There she met another young researcher, our colleague Zacatecan Jones, who had just returned from an excavation expedition in Egypt and brought with him a copy of the pseudo-Critias, which he had found by chance in a Cairo junk shop. The manuscript was of great interest to the young journalist Jack La Salle. Unfortunately, his curiosity got the better of him. 
-Jack La Salle? So he's found his way here, too?
-By pure chance. He was looking for the treasure he claimed his ancestor, the French explorer Cavelier de La Salle, had brought with him in the holds of the ship La Belle, which was wrecked on the banks of the Mississippi. He said that his forefather, acting on the orders of King Louis XIV, wanted to found a new French empire right here in America, and that he had been given the mission of carrying out his project in Oklahoma. Aren’t French cars, Cadillacs, Pontiacs and Chevrolet already plying our roads and freeways ? Haven’t French fries, French cheese and French wines already conquered our restaurants ? 
-Not to forget the celebrated French kiss, of course. No army on earth can resist it. These oddities seem to me more likely to be produced by the whimsical brain of a schoolboy than by a scientist as venerable as you, Dr. Sax. La Salle's body was discovered on the bank of the North Canadian River, east of Woodward. It's almost certain that the journalist was liquidated by some of the town's notables, whose malfeasance he had denounced in his newspaper. The police investigation has not yet been able to prove this with certainty, but all the clues point in that direction. What's more, his writings have been found. There was never any mention of his visit to Xanadu nor any claim that he descended from Cavelier de la Salle.
-La Salle didn't have time to talk about it. It wasn't local enemies who liquidated him. Norea will no doubt tell you more about this. But I can assure you that he did stay at our research center.
-You can't expect me to believe that I'm here in Atlantis. I may have my head in the clouds, but I've got both feet in the mire at the moment. What I can't see, smell, touch or hear simply doesn't exist for me. I'm not ready to subscribe wholeheartedly to the first Hollywood fairy tale or myth, the first conspiracy theory. 
-Is this library you see here the product of my fantasies? If you can contemplate it, it's because Norea is descended from Atala, Chaeaubriand’s preferred American heroin. Atala is short for Atlanta or Atlantis. Thanks to NASA and its Atlantis rocket, her name has even been carried outer-space. But Atala is also the heir of Poseidon and Clitô, who reigned over Atlantis, as attested in the second part of the Critias. What's more, according to Hopi legend, she is also descended from Aya, model of all the mother goddesses of humanity and queen of a serpentine race from the Orion region that fought a very long battle with the fascist race of wolves from Sirius for the conquest of our planet. Emigrating to the United States, she took the nickname Atala, founded the city of Atlanta and allied herself with the Natchez tribe, allies of the French against the Spanish. Today, she hopes to re-conquer French Louisiana which, she says, Napoleon should never have sold for peanuts to the United States. 
-For your information, my Swiss fellow countryman, Geneva-born Albert Gallatin, first Secretary of the Treasury under president Monroe, United States ambassador to France and England and founder of the University of New York, was the main negociator of the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled in no time the size of the United States. He would roll over in his New York grave if he learned about your fairy tale.
.-With her assistant and lover Zacatecan Jones, Norea nonetheless establishes the legitimacy of her divine lineage through the Critias codex, and takes possession of the Gnostic library brought to America by Cavelier de La Salle on the orders of the French king in the 17th century. Her watchword is Make America French Again (MAFA). And so, through Norea and her inheritance rights, the remains of the great libraries of the ancient world are here, before your very eyes. And you are her guest. 
I take two steps forward.
-Her guest? You mean her prisoner, I say rudely. I won't hide from you the fact that all this talk of Plato and the new Atlantis, set against a backdrop of star wars and conspiracy theories, doesn't concern me. The only thing that matters to me right now is what I'm doing here. Far more than the divine genealogy of your boss, Norea, I want to know exactly what she wants from me. 
Dr. Sax lets out a shrill laugh.
-I'll give you an answer that will satisfy you, he replies. And he adds:
-Follow me. It's time you knew.


 

 
 










4
 

...many a window many a door
And many a division let in & out into the vast unknown
William Blake, The Four Zoas
 
Following Dr. Sax, I traverse an endless succession of staircases and corridors, a network of galleries stretching beneath the entire mountain. Alarm signals, laser-guarded passages, cameras. Rooms and rooms in the heart of the mountain, full of graffiti. I lose all sense of direction in this labyrinth. I'm losing my mind.
Dr. Sax stops in front of a heavy, dark door. Fiddling with the bolt, he opens it.
The door opens onto an open courtyard. In the middle of this courtyard, a man tied to a stake and crouching on the ground is trying to protect himself from the whip blows administered by a baboon in a tuxedo, accompanied by other equally elegant baboons. 
-Get down, sir, get down! orders the baboon, brandishing his riding crop, as the man tries to get up, to the great laughter of the other animals.
With each blow, his whole body twists. I move closer, to get a better look at the man's face. He turns around, his mouth open. And I'm petrified.
This prisoner, bending and groaning under the blows, I recognize: he's none other than the bank manager of the town of Osage, Arthur de Las Vegas, whose kidnapping a few months earlier by a commando from the Jennings brothers' gang had been announced in the press. And these baboons are his kidnappers, as Dr. Sax confirms to me:
-The Jennings brothers found it more convenient, practical and expedient to kidnap the bank manager rather than steal his money. They hoped to make more cash by releasing him for ransom, but when they learned that the bank's vaults were almost empty, they didn't know what to do with him. Eager to contribute to the progress of science, they entrusted him to me for a few dollars as a guinea pig.
-But how did they turn into baboons?
-It's the result of all our education, Sax says: the return to our primate condition, that's what public education and centuries of science and philosophy have succeeded in doing to them. We didn't even need to genetically modify them. The mutation took care of itself. As for the banker, we hoped to get him back, to re-educate him in a way. But he made no effort to integrate into our community. And we soon realized that he was of no further use to us.
The scientist explains that the treatment he's referring to is a gene mutation process specially developed at Xanadu on the basis of recipes discovered in Alexandrian scientific treatises. But de Las Vegas seems reluctant to undergo such a treatment, Sax tells me. He adds:
-So we're going to have to treat him by force.
He signals two baboons to untie their prisoner and take him to a nearby room. Pointing to this room, he says:
-Please, come in.
I enter a sort of shed or hangar, poorly lit and cluttered with discarded machinery and a bathtub.
Sax asks the baboons to undress the bank director, who struggles and screams, much to the delight of the elegant simians. Then he orders them to plunge him into the bathtub.
-We're going to proceed with the transmutation of this individual in the manner handed down to us by the ancient Egyptians, but using techniques perfected in Alexandria by Eratosthenes himself, says the doctor in a serious voice. In other words, you're about to witness the first live mummification since antiquity, but using a process closer to today's electroplating techniques than to traditional mummification, which involves cleaning the viscera from the human body and replacing them with embalming. Such a process enables us to keep vital organs intact while plunging the patient into a state of lethargy or hibernation close to death, of indefinite duration but which can be reversed at any time. Of course, the process is not yet fully perfected. It's the waking phase in particular that leaves something to be desired. That's why we only experiment with monkeys and prisoners. This one – de Las Vegas - will do just as well.
The doctor invites me to approach the bathtub - in fact, it's a vast sandstone vat filled with a liquid with a mercury sheen - to follow the operation. A baboon assistant first connects a cathode to the body of Las Vegas, naked as on his first day and whose howls of terror fill the room. To silence his throat-clearing screams, he is given a generous blow on the head with a club. Then two other baboons vigorously seize him, one under the armpits and the other by the feet, and immerse him in suspension in the electrolytic bath composed of distilled water, copper vitriol and concentrated sulfuric acid, or H2SO4, whose corrosive effect has been neutralized with a suitable solution. Otherwise, the unfortunate man, already in a rather sorry state, would have been dissolved in no time.
-An old Alexandrian recipe, explains Dr Sax. What's more, we've modified his genetic structure in such a way that, when he wakes up, he'll have become the most dependent, the most absolutely obedient of individuals, taking our orders without question.
Meanwhile, another assistant checks the DC power supply and precisely adjusts the intensity of the current coupled to the transformer using the potentiometer. 
The operation can begin. 
-In fact, continues the scientist, this galvanization-like process is just a placebo. Thanks to it, we're going to transform the body of this gentleman into orichalcum, the precious ore of Atlantis, as described by your colleague Plato. Essentially, the technique is as follows: skin tissue is coated with a thin layer of nitrate to make it conductive. After complete anaesthesia (albeit abbreviated, for reasons of economy, in this case), the body has now been immersed in this bath, which is in fact orichalcum sulphate, a metal endowed with the most powerful energetic properties, even more powerful than Hahn and Strassmann's atomic reaction! Even better... there will be no surface malformations, no radio-active by-products. And polarization will accomplish its work without damaging a single vital organ. So, instead of a poor wretch's copper statue, tomorrow you'll have a statue made of a metal more precious than gold and silver, a statue, in a word, worthy of Poseidon's granddaughter, Cleopatra's and Eve's descendant, Norea.
The operation would last all night. Beret on top, sleeves of his white blouse rolled up, a baboon assistant, bent over the bathtub where Arthur de Las Vegas seems to be cozily dozing, is lavishing him with the blandices of the underwater shower. In reality, he's working magna cum diligentia to transmute him into a block of orichalcum. Sax and I go out and don't come back until the next morning, to see the bank director - or what still passed for one the day before - removed from his bath and carefully rinsed with clear running water. In front of my eyes I see an oblong object with shapes identical in every way to those of de Las Vegas, perfectly rigid, with reflections of quicksilver, copper and antimony. 
I ask Sax:
-Is he dead?
-Like an Egyptian mummy, replies the professor coldly. Too bad we can't throw his viscera to the scavengers.
While an assistant disconnects the power, the object is deposited in a sort of sarcophagus which two baboons carry out of the room.
-Here's another one ready for the big trip. Follow me, says Sax.
We enter a laboratory whose walls are covered with large rays of glass spheres, filled with liquid in which embryos float like suspended animalcules.
-These organisms are far superior to androids in their capacity for autonomous thought and action, explains Dr. Sax. 
-Very impressive.
-I knew you'd like it.
I take a closer look at the embryos. Cautiously, I ask:
-Tell me, Professor. Once they've reached maturity, are these embryos destined to end up in the bathtub for electroplating, too?
-No. We're using these andropoïd clones to replace the current government and industry leaders of our newly established Republic of Xanadu, whom we can then control and manipulate as we see fit. Half of our Parliament and our Court of Justice, of the public administration, as well as major companies, are already filled with our obedient and docile cybernetic baboons and under their control. We carefully select them among the most incompetent and ignorant candidates, as they are easier to manipulate, to indoctrinate, to make docile and obedient. We rate them in particular on their ability to lie, distort facts, generate fake news, spread disbelief and stir up chaos. Norea has decided this. Besides, she herself...
-Herself, what... would she be too?...
I'm afraid to hear the rest, which I don't even dare to conceive.
-Yes, she was one of those embryos, an organism genetically modified by me and brought to maturity. But, in her case, the copy got a little out of hand. In fact, I no longer have any authority over her. And it's not just a banal generation conflict. I’ve lost control of her. To the point where she's taken command of the center. She's become more perfect than the original, as you'll soon see for yourself.
Speechless, incapable of the slightest reaction, I allow myself to be led into the armor room, where the doctor now takes me. A strange room indeed. A blast of cold air hits my face. The temperature in the room is like a cellar.
At first, the half-light prevents me from appreciating the room's proportions. The lighting is deliberately minimal, consisting of a dozen electric lamps on the floor, glowing in the dark.
My eyes slowly become accustomed to this reddish light, which reveals only the lower part of this vast, perfectly circular room. The entire vault, shaped like a geodesic dome like the library, is shrouded in shadow, and I can't tell how high it is. 
I face the curved walls. I can't take my eyes off them. I realize that they are divided into a series of dark niches, each about nine feet high and three wide. I make a rough estimate of their number. I count about one hundred and sixty for the entire room. Each of these niches contains a kind of crate similar to the sarcophagus in which the petrified body of Arthur de Las Vegas was brought. He was taken out of its container, straightened up and placed in one of the niches whose case was still empty. A label is already attached to the foot of the niche with these words:
De Las Vegas, Arthur, Osage City Bank Manager. Born in Great Plains City on April 26, 1924, died at Xanadu on August 18, 1965.
I exclaim: 
-Tell me I'm dreaming!
-Not so loud, says Dr. Sax, as if we were inside a cathedral. One must not raise one's voice in this place.
What are those other statues? I want to see. I'm getting closer.
Among the occupants of the armor hall are Norea's former companions, the entire panoply of Templars and Teutonic Knights, from the order's founder, Jacques de Molay, to members of the Germanenordern and the Thule Society. Here are the young crowned heroes, the Bohémond, the Pierre de Chypre, the Amaury de Lusignan... And, lost among them all, Temple Lea Houston, frozen for eternity in his orichalcum silence.
- Did you capture him too? So I wasn't dreaming. Houston is gone...
- Once again, please lower your voice, says Sax.
In a separate alcove I discover the box containing Zacatecan Jones, Norea's lover and lieutenant. 
-This is the fate our mistress reserves for those guilty of loving her too much, Sax tells me. And your friend Houston was one of them. They're all preserved here for eternity. When she decides, Norea will wake them up. The galvanization process I subjected them to can easily be reversed, remember.
I'm at a loss for words. Emotion is strangling my voice. I can't take it anymore. My head is spinning, I feel drunk. I feel as if I'm plunged into a liquaqueous subterranean world, where the statues around me multiply, fragment, merge with the surrounding shadows.
The Knights of the Apocalypse, in purple robes, stand like magi on thrones along the wall. They begin to swell, rising along the walls, curving as they reach the vault. Along my body, on either side, a whole procession of dignitaries mounted on mules, with their cloaks, swords and helmets, pass by, and each one whispers in my ear: Why do you pretend to hate us, young unbeliever? Aren't we Atlanteans?
They fade into the thick reddish light that forms a blood clot in the middle of the room. Temple Lea Houston winks at me before disappearing. 
Then I feel someone shake me by the shoulders. Slowly, I emerge from my light coma. It was only a momentary discomfort. With infinite care and gentleness, Dr. Sax leads me away from the metal statues, which have now regained their fixed gaze. A moment later, I find myself seated, or rather collapsed, in one of the armchairs in the center of the room.
The professor is facing me. My pulse beats violently, my head is on fire. An immense fever is burning me.
Footsteps can be heard behind the door.
Sax checks his watch.
-It's time to resume our guided tour of the center, he says.
The door opens. A tall Ute Indian, the tallest I've seen so far in this spooky abode, enters and comes towards us. He bows and lightly touches my arm.
-Follow him, says Dr Sax.
Without a word, I obey.

 


 5

 I come in Self-anihilation & the grandeur of Inspiration
...
To take off his filthy garments, & clothe him with Imagination
William Blake, Milton
 
My guide and I follow a new corridor. My confusion is beyond description. We stop before a small door. The Indian steps aside to let me through. I try to convince myself that my heightened imagination is playing tricks on me. I'm now in the most comfortable of decontamination rooms. From the silver mirror on the ceiling, a cheerful pink light falls on the marble floor. A clock hangs on the wall, shaped like the seven folds of the orphic serpent Phanes. The surrounding numerals have been replaced by the signs of the zodiac. The small hand has not yet quite reached the sign of Ariès.
Three o'clock, it's only three o'clock in the afternoon!
On a shelf I can see several jewels engraved and painted with fantastic figures, names and strange formulas. One of these figures shows a coiled, lion-headed serpent with the name of the demiurge Ialdabaôth. Other gems bear the names of the guardians emanating from the upper world of the Lamanites - Aberamenthô, Agrammakhamareï, Seseggenbarpharaggen.
I remember reading somewhere that the Utes, who seem to make up the main battalions of Norea, the Fellahin of Zacatec, are considered descendants of the Lamanites, the last of the ten tribes of Israel who were lost after their Babylonian captivity. According to the Book of Mormon, which recounts their history, greatness and misfortunes on the American continent, they emigrated to America. They were soon joined by the French Templars, predecessors of the famous wood runners, with whom they sealed an alliance. Together, they founded the future Louisiana. After American Independence, the Lamanites joined with other Indian tribes to establish the Five Nations Territory. Their alliance with the Southern Confederates during the American Civil War led to their elimination by the federal government. 
They are now re-emerging underground and attempting to recreate their lost territory. 
However, dissension soon arose among the Lamanites. Some, faithful to their past alliance with the French, like the Fellahin of Zacatec, militate for a return to the borders of old Louisiana. Their credo is Make America French Again (MAFA). The others claim their origins are Spanish, and want to re-establish the old empire of the conquistadores. The struggle between them is now total. 
On a small ivory table, I can see a chiselled alabaster bowl. In its hollow, sixteen naked human figures are arranged in a circle, their feet converging towards the center, occupied by a coiled snake.
Elegant pottery, carefully polished with delicate geometric figures beautifully hand-painted on their surface, sits on the shelves.
This day already seems longer than a century... And I'm barely halfway through it. 
-All those presented to our mistress must first pass through here, my guide tells me. 
A large orichalcum mirror fills an entire wall of this room. As I glance at it, I realize that, decently, the mistress's demands are not exaggerated. My unkempt beard, a frightening layer of grime filling my eyes, falling in gullies down my cheeks, my clothes stained by all the mud of the desert, torn to pieces by all the brambles of Xanadu, have transformed me, to tell the truth, into a rather pitiful guest.
Not that I intend to compete with the occupants of the armoury. These are the Fellahin, the true descendants of the ancient Atlanteans, the warriors who conquered Palestine, who ruled northern Europe with the sword and the cross. They are the Zacatecan Jones. But who am I? I try to recognize myself in the mirror, where the image of my sickly, greenish, tired, hepatic and fat face floats in its aquarium. I look at my rosy cheeks, my face as inexpressive as a puddle of melted wax. My hands are as round and chubby as a child's. In the mirror, the almost completely distorted reflection of my ghost trembles.
I try to persuade myself that my appearance and lack of talent might be my best defenses. At the thought that Norea might be interested in a trembling jellyfish like me, I start laughing.
Before plunging into the bath, motionless in front of the mirror that reflects my image, I watch myself laugh. Such a confrontation isn't pointless. I certainly can't be an interesting candidate for the armor room. Not like Zacatecan Jones and the others. Not even like Temple Houston. All these brave and talented young men are too serious competitors.
In the blink of an eye, I strip and dive into the porphyry tub in the middle of the bathroom. Thirty-eight degrees! That's just the way I like it! A delicious numbness washes over me in the warm, perfumed water. The soft moistness of the air soothes the tension in my nerves.
After all, if I can land an exclusive interview with this she-devil, why not play her game? Besides, I have no choice. Calypso's apartments it is! On one condition, that I'm not taken too long to get there. After the hike I've just completed, I really wouldn't mind a few moments' rest. But let it be understood that I shall not be a cause of annoyance to anyone, and that as long as I remain here…
I feel nothing but sweetness in the warm, soapy water in which my exhausted body is bathing. I still 
have enough strength left to think to hell with Atlantis and the Templars and Dr. Sax.
And I fall asleep in my bath.









6
 

Repeated knocks on the door wake me up. Without waiting for me to invite him in, the same Lamanite who escorted me here brings towels and clothes. At the clock, the small hand has almost reached the sign of Taurus. I ask my guide:
-By the way, what's your name?
-My name is Gogessos.
-That's not an Indian name, I point out. 
-We all bear the name that Norea, our Mother, chose for us.
-Are you a Fellahin too, or an alien? 
Without even answering, he lifts me like a feather, out of my scented water, which has turned into a mucky swamp.
Within moments, I'm dried off, massaged vigorously, dressed and shaved.
I am delighted to contemplate my face in the mirror, which has now completely reappeared.
As the Fellahin finishes tidying up the room, I say to myself: if Norea speaks to me, I simply won't answer. I'll remain mute.
The bath was delicious, I tell myself, looking at myself in the mirror with a satisfied eye. The welcome was perfect. Yes, but then there's the REST. 
I can't help but feel a slight tremor at the thought of the armor room.
At the same moment, the clock strikes seventeen-thirty.
Taking two steps forward, the Lamanite touches my arm and beckons.
Again, I follow my guide.
 

 



7

Surely some revelation is at hand…
W. B. Yeats, The Second Coming
 
Once again, we make our way through long corridors. The guide moves, turning switches; corridors and staircases light up as we pass, and behind us fall back into shadow. 
I'm moved, but I've regained a certain nonchalance in contact with the water. 
I can see our two shadows rising up the huge winding stairs. Our feet slip on the polished steps. As we climb, the staircase becomes narrower and the wall thicker.
Invisible bats come and go with thin, plaintive cries. Halogen bulbs are spaced about twenty paces apart along the vaults, but the power supply must have been cut off, as the light is dim. I had imagined the staircase to Norea's apartments quite differently. I didn't expect to find a palace, of course, but something a little more appetizing. In the shadows, I stumble on the iron steps. I contract my nostrils to avoid the awful smell of damp, bland catacombs. The sooty glow of over-spaced light bulbs yellows the walls glistening with saltpeter. The lead pipes crawling along their sides resemble snake nodes. It's part prison, part sewer. 
This mountain is more riddled with galleries than an Egyptian pyramid. It's like a Maginot Line, a network of windowless corridors. There must be hundreds of kilometers of tunnels running under the mountain. Any attacker from the outside would be immediately trapped in such a maze. They could be attacked from both sides and behind before they knew what hit them.
We arrive at a huge door made of precious wood. My guide rings the bell and the double door opens. The Fellahin bows, beckoning me in, and closes the door behind me again.
Mechanically, I take a few steps into the room I've just entered alone, then stop, paralyzed, on the spot. And my gaze becomes fixed, fixed.
Amidst the bizarre luxury that surrounds her, Norea stands before me.




8

 
Ricorditi di me, che son la Pia;
Siena mi fe, disfecemi Maremma.
Dante, Purgatorio V, 133
 
She smiles.
I remain standing, like a candle. Norea, in tight black battle dress, a white muslin scarf around her waist, stands against the door, as if to block my way. Her dark hair is coiled, braided, above her head. 
She realizes the effect she's having on me. And she doesn't seem to mind my consternation. She smiles.
It's a very pleasant apartment she lives in. A large room, arranged soberly but not without luxury, in a studio, airy and full of light, communicates with a toilet that the best-kept demi-mondaine would not have disavowed. The walls are adorned with some fine English engravings. A round, glass-covered ebony table supports a crystal vase filled with roses that a human hand would probably not have arranged so well. A divan-bed, huge and low as it should be, no more than a foot and a half high, occupies the middle. On either side are vast tan leather armchairs. The ensemble is completed by a work table, which perhaps doesn't have excessive merit in not being cluttered with correspondence or superfluous paperwork.
I can't help but flinch when I see this strange, dark ghost. I have great difficulty distinguishing between reality and something that is no longer quite of the same order, although I can't really call it a dream, but here.…
She could be twenty or twenty-five. Brunette, very matte-skinned, weary-looking, behind those eyes of a dark, enthusiastic warrior in battle, those hawk eyes, those dark eyes with hyacinth reflections, turning emerald green at times, beneath that charming mess, what is she? What's in that thin forehead? I move even closer.
She smiles slightly, as if in a dream. I'm sure I've seen her somewhere before. Is she the actress Brigitte Helm in German director Georg Wilhelm Pabst's Die Herrin von Atlantis? But it can't be her. So who is this woman?
She asks me to move towards her. I take five steps in her direction. Up close, her face has a strange pallor, a waxen immobility. I'm almost afraid to go any closer. I stare at her mouth…
-Again, she says. This time, there's no doubt: her lips don't move when she speaks. 
Draped in her mutism, hallucinating in her icy beauty, she has black eyes that have never cried, but that burn; black eyebrows that come together and give her an air of hardness belied by the network of her immobile lips; a Moorish complexion that a man warms up to as if in the sun... A hunched waist, the slender waist of a corvette built to race, that rushes at the merchant ship with impetuosity, bites it and sinks it low in two. 
I take another step and place my hand on her chest.
It's not a woman, nor a man. I'm looking at a synthetic mannequin for a fashion showcase. Norea's lovely smile is a figment of my imagination. Was old Sax right? This woman is a clone, a talking android, a highly-developed GMO.
-Don't touch, it's mined, says the charming voice of Poseidon's descendant in an ironic, half-Boston, half-Prussian accent, underscoring the ridiculousness of my situation. 
-Excuse me, I'm an idiot. 
-As a rule of thumb, she says sternly and without retort, you'll always refrain from any familiarity with me.
Where's that voice coming from? The sounds aren't coming from the mannequin itself, it's likely, but from a speaker hidden right next to it.
So I'm being watched by someone invisible, by a hologram or a computer-generated image. It's very unpleasant. I feel clumsy, threatened, at fault. The girl talking to me is, as well, sitting light-years away…
For a few long seconds, she looks at me with a satisfied, ironic air, in silence, like an insect in a trap, on her television screen. I must look very pale. My confusion is beyond words. I'm sure she's laughing at me. Only later, much later, will I understand how much it served me. Such a trembling interlocutor cannot be an adversary. 
All the same, I try to put on a brave face. 
Then a half-smile passes over her lips. She speaks at last, and I realize that her lips, like the rest of her, are real. Or maybe the cloning - is this really Dr. Sax's work? - is quite successful:
-Let's talk. We've got some serious talking to do. So, you're a reporter for Woodward News. There's no point in denying it. We found a Social Security card mentioning it in your clothes.
I remain a little sheepish. But, at her question, my embarrassment quickly turns to fright. 
I summon up all my courage.
- No, no, not a reporter, I protest. I'm only a Swiss non-immigrant student enrolled in Woodward Senior School's Trade and Industrial program. I've been training as an aid at the newspaper's printing works, not as a reporter. As for my social security card, I had to have it drawn up like any other employed person.
-No matter. You've already worked in the press, that's enough for us. It proves that you have access to a professional network, however small. So you'll be my information secretary. Does it shock you to work for a woman? Because, as I hope, we're going to work together.
There's provocation in her voice - a very soft, musical, warm voice, with low resonances that give it an air of sensual intimacy. I admire the magnificent twist of her neck, to which the head is joined by a combination of vigorous lines, and from which a few rolls of small hair rise forcefully. 
I immediately decide to play along.
-No, on the contrary.
I feel ridiculous and awkward. In any case, I have no choice.
Norea seems in no hurry to say anything more. She observes me attentively, without complacency. Perhaps she has an unfavorable opinion of my abilities. I dread the verdict, which comes at the end of the exam:
-It's impossible for you to run away. It’s too late. The exit is guarded. 
The young woman no doubt feels that further explanation is necessary, as she undertakes a longer speech:
-I hope you'll forgive our methods. I'm sure you'll end up not resenting some of the brusque ways we've treated you. We had to kidnap you when you showed up on the way to the Center. We have an absolute obligation to work like this: to keep an eye on our potential enemies, to check the loyalty of our new friends, all the more so if they are journalists - in short, we must always act with the utmost precaution.
- I'll say it again: I'm not a journalist.
- No matter. Our action is secret, by necessity. It involves major risks for us. You're going to help us. You're going to write about us in the Woodward News when you get back.
-But I have no intention of returning to Woodard! I took the train to Los Angeles to begin my college studies... I'll be penalized if I don't show up when the Fall semester starts.
-Well, it's only a postponement. We've changed your itinerary. You're going to go back to Woodward, or rather Osage, as it's really called, and explain to your readers that we need to make the outside world aware of the true nature of our struggle. We'll give you precise instructions. But we prefer (at least at first) not to reveal to you the real purpose of our mission, nor the general meaning of our undertaking. Just as a precaution, and also for the sake of efficiency.
I ask her what would happen if I refused to cooperate. In fact, she offers me no alternative. I'm beginning to realize that I'm no longer in complete control of my actions.
-You don't have a choice. So you accept without question. No need to ask questions or make remarks. You do as you're told and that's that.
I like freedom. I like being responsible for my actions. I like to understand what I'm doing... And, despite this, I accept this strange deal.
It's not fear that motivates me. Then, what is it? Curiosity? A penchant for bravado? Or some other obscure reason?
- From now on, you'll be my assistant.
-I'm not the kind of man who meets women like you. You're imagining things…
-You need money. We pay. For the last time, don't ask questions. You're going to work under my direction in my disinformation department. Those who hold the keys to disinformation also hold the keys to information, and those who hold the keys to information hold the keys to the world. I'm not going to teach this to a future journalist. We have to open the eyes of the public, subverted by the school and cretinized by the press... Aren't the school and the press, those two diabolical inventions of the same man, Benjamin Franklin, that potbellied, clumsy Quaker, that secular saint in a black vest, that sinister philanthropist who, with his false biblical bonhomie, made Lake Michigan a twin brother of your Lake Geneva, the cause of all our ills? The school, the press... the two mammals of democracy, the two factories of conformity, consensus, consumerism and cretinism… and you have one foot in each. We need to re-educate the masses, and fast. In the meantime, here's your basic reading... It's up to you to see how to make it accessible to your readers.
Saying this, holding the tablets of the Law as carefully as Moses, she hands me a thick codex she's taken from a shelf. I recognize it as the pseudo-Critias. 
-I asked Dr. Sax to bring me the manuscript. My lieutenant Zacatecan Jones discovered it during his excavations in Upper Egypt. 
-Yes, Doctor Sax has already explained this to me.
-This apocryphal version of the Critias is my bible, my Mein Kampf. It confirms my divine lineage. This is what you're going to explain to the public. 
-My editor-in-chief, or anyone else, will never believe me. 
-You're on your own. Others would like to be the first to know. Dan Brown and J. K. Rowling have already written to me to gain access to our center's library and consult this text. After pointing out the enormities contained in their respective fictions, I advised our two best-selling authors to study hamito-semitic languages and ancient Greek first, but they preferred to take marketing courses.
-I don't intend to compete with them on that score.
-You can also explain to your readers that because I was raped by the evil Archons, I'm sometimes portrayed as a girl of ill repute. It's a fact that I was a prostitute in a Constantinople brothel, back in the days when prostitution was at its height. My name was Helena. Maxim's, Black Rose, Taxim, Regency, I had to earn my living in all these illustrious nightclubs. In that gold-spangled mud, no one today can say, in the final analysis, how far Norea's ankles were forced to sink. Yes, I'm the Virgo and the virago.
-Not enough for a paragraph in the variety section of my newspaper, I tell you. Do you have anything else for our readers?
-I may as well have been a dancer at the Khabarovsk Station buffet and a pimp in a Macao casino, from which I left with the cash register. I was a liberated woman. An intellectual. In the seventeenth century, I would have run a salon. I didn't want to be a stay-at-home mom, that's all. What more little true facts do you want? That's what you'll tell your readers in your celebrity articles. And you'll rectify my image accordingly. 
Impatient, I say:
- What I'd like to know is what I'm doing here. And what Temple Houston and Jack La Salle were doing here before me.
-We had to catch them on their way to the center, too. They were a little too interested in our research. La Salle was looking for the treasure brought to America by his pseudo-ancestor and Houston was looking for La Salle who dreamed of returning to his past lives, convinced that ours is but a shadow, a simulacrum.
- Indeed, for Descartes, as for Plato and his prisoners in the cave, aren't we all shadows, simulacra? In other words, virtual realities?
- All kinds of lunatics have returned to their past lives, especially since TV zapping has turned them into a collective reverie. We're all trapped in a dream, whether we like it or not. Time serialism has collapsed and I'm here when I should be dead or unborn or eternal instead of, as here and now, in between.
-So can you tell me if I'm in my dream or yours? Unless our two dreams are intersecting right now. 
- La Salle wanted to know for sure, so he decided to interview the prophet Mani, a renowned expert on the subject. In fact, it was I who recommended him. My grandmother came from Erivan and worshipped fire, the most beautiful religion in the world. She used to make her devotions on the Sourahaneh plateau, near Baku, on the banks of my native Caspian. There stands a temple once built in honor of fire by the followers of Zoroaster. A Gebre still officiates there, in strange white clothes. All around are naphtha wells, salt ponds and the flaming sea, over which wild ducks circle endlessly. If you ever go there - provided I let you out again, of course - be sure to visit the great courtyard, with its Indian festoons. Mani, the prophet who called himself Buddha, stopped here on his way to Qumran.
-I've always dreamed of meeting the prophet Mani, too. And how did La Salle arrange to interview him?
-We lent him our time machine. Time is just another form of space, as the scientists say. But on the way back, due to a minor mechanical problem, we lost contact with La Salle, somewhere between the year 50 and the present day. Too bad for that idiot. As someone who dreamed of rediscovering his past lives, he was spoiled for choice.
She's off to find another manuscript.
-Last but not least, here is the apocryphal version of the story of Jonah, the little Old Testament prophet. You probably remember the canonical version…
-Jonah, a reporter for the Nineveh Times, if I remember my catechism correctly, is commissioned by his editor-in-chief, God Himself, the first writer and thus founding father of journalism and of chatbots, to admonish the depraved population of Nineveh. Instead, he goes on the run. He made his way to the port of Jaffa, where he boarded a Cypriot-flagged mixed cargo ship bound for Limassol as a stowaway. En route, during a storm, he is discovered at the bottom of the hold by the sailors, who blame him for the storm. After drawing straws, the crew decide to throw him overboard.
-That's one way of looking at it. However, if that's how you intend to present the facts to your readers, I have no objection. I'm all for freedom of the press, after all. But go on.
-Thrown into the sea, Jonah is rescued by Captain Nobody, commander of the U. S. nuclear submarine. U. S. S. Moby Dick. Captain Nobody offers him a trip to the bottom of the ocean, and they visit the sunken ruins of ancient Alexandria. Then they return to the belly of the whale.
-And how long does Jonas spend at the bottom of the submarine?
-Three days, if memory serves me. But it stinks in there, he says. And what humidity! He has a hard time of it, and desperately searches for the way out of the labyrinth, eventually finding... its entrance.
- And the apocryphal version of Jonah's story brings nuances to the biblical version that are hardly obvious to the uninformed reader. These include the following: while the official version has Jonah imprisoned in the cetacean's wet, slimy, dark belly, the apocryphal version has the whale's bottom dry.
After a pause, she resumes:
-Yes, I repeat: the bottom of the whale is dry. The apocryphal version is quite clear on this point: it uses the word djaïeh, which means desert in Coptic, the language of the pseudo-Critias (whereas the biblical version speaks only of underwater mountains). In fact, only the apocryphal version makes it possible to understand the expression desert crossing or the Descent into Hell.
-From the Odyssey and the Aeneid to T. S. Eliot's Wasteland, William Burroughs, Allan Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, The Village Voice and the Beat Generation, not forgetting the Divine Comedy, the Quest for the Grail, the Balzacian cycle and the works of Dostoievski, we know what fortune this expression has had down the centuries. No newspaper has yet managed to sell such a scoop. Not even the Woodward News…
-But back to our descent... into business. My program of re-education, detoxification and counter-propaganda is based on the apocryphal Critias. This book will therefore be your first compulsory reading. It describes my plan for the return of the Ogdoad, otherwise known as Atlantis.  
-I will never be an accomplice to your evil, megalomaniac plans for world domination! If I ever manage to get out of here, you can count on me to report to the FBI - and not just the press - on your activities and your gang of revisionist bigots, lunatics and fascists! 
-For those who are resistant to our cause, or who show themselves to be too independent, I reserve special treatment. I let them go free. It's up to them to decide whether it's worth trying to reach the nearest outpost in the desert. And the desert is vast…
Norea puts her hand on my shoulder and, looking me straight in the eyes with a confident smile, she whispers:
-You're sweet and I like you, little brother. So you know what awaits you if you don't cooperate: the slowest, most horrible death - death by dehydration and exhaustion in the desert. This is the fate we reserved for Jack La Salle. He didn't walk for long. He died of thirst and exhaustion after just two days. We followed him, retrieved his corpse and…
-...and you deposited him incognito on the banks of the North Canadian River, after putting bullet holes in him to make it look like he'd been murdered!
-Well, for an aspiring journalist, you're certainly not lacking in flair. That's exactly what we did.
-You're a monster, Norea. You're always looking for excuses, making excuses for yourself. Norea, Miss Norea Hamilton, whoever you are, virtual image or not, the time has come when it's your turn to pay. I'm going to kill you.
Raising my arm, I step forward, ready to strike. But she doesn't take a step back. With unheard-of arrogance, she continues to stand up to me. With one hand, she stops me in mid-stride, and with the other, she presses a buzzer. Behind me, I hear the door open abruptly and two Lamanites rushing in towards me. The next thing I know, I'm bound, gagged and thrown to the floor in a corner of the room.
Then Norea summons Doctor Sax. Pointing to me as if I were a pile of dirty laundry on the floor, she tells him:
-I had intended to let our Phil Marlowe go off into the desert to his fate, but I've revised my plans. You're going to galvanize him and add him to my collection of trinkets, too.
Then I witness the strangest of scenes, which I'm not sure whether to laugh at or be appalled by. Without even listening to her, the ridiculous Dr. Sax burns to embrace the mistress of the house. But the daughter of the Archons, seeing with inexpressible horror and joy the swelling of his violently apoplectic neck, shrinks back, subjecting the pitiful suitor to icy showers. 
Doctor Sax, then: 
-Look at me. Am I not your progenitor? I gave you the gift of speech when, as a simple embryo genetically modified by me, clay doll, golem creature, flesh android, you could only say Ha! ha! and good night, my dear. You were no more than a wooden or metal robot, an automaton created by Vaucanson or Maëtzel, or a Hollywood droid. 
-But now I'm in charge. The pupil has surpassed the master, my old Sax.
-Beneath the surface of your perfect flesh, supple, warm, tender and fragrant, beneath your bosom that lifts with your breath and gasps with emotion, have you forgotten that there is no heart? Therefore, you have no blood. Between your golden lungs and your perfect legs, what's inside your feminine, even human body? Absorbing only distilled water and a few chemical tablets at regular intervals, have you forgotten that you have no digestive system? Have you forgotten that you were, at first, nothing more than a computer implanted in an animated statue? 
-A computer?
-But then, I couldn't have foreseen that the program I implemented would be so powerful that the virtual image has surpassed its model. The shadow is now more real than the synthetic image that projected it, the ghost more profoundly, more intensely real than the living. And yet, if you're an angel, like all angels, you're nothing but fire and light... hermaphroditic and sterile. Whereas I…
He couldn't take it anymore. His horrible little yellow eyes gleam. A saraband of mad desires swirls in them. Passion goes to his head. Breathing like a bear, he approaches Norea with an atrocious smile. With his hideous hooked hands, bristling with red hair, he lacerates her apron, with his fingernails he streaks her skin with bloody furrows, while an excruciating fire burns his cold lips like a snake's hands. A muffled roar rises from the caverns of his soul and spurts from the row of his cruel carnivorous teeth - he a centaur vomited from Tartarus:
-Look at me, I'm a Tiger! 
And, continuing to take his Promethean dream for granted, the old scientist, now gaga, puffing like a bear, throws his Herodiad, his future Eve, onto the sofa, no doubt forgetting that she's just a mummy. Or a hologram. In one fell swoop he rips off her tunic, tears the muslin sash that conceals the graces of her amber belly... 
As for me, I remain mummified with astonishment at the sight of this scene.
The long abstinence, the life spent in a dream of power, have done nothing but prepare the Cagliostro of the desert even more for his irrepressible desire.
- I beg for just one kiss, and then let me die.
-Well, die! Die quickly, replies his fairy. 
Planting the calm gaze of her magnificent eyes in those of the monster, she bites him down to his emaciated lips, which seek hers.
When he lets go under the pain, a slap resounds in the alcove.
-Toad! Andouille! Anhypothetical monkey!
Sax replies calmly:
-Music from limbo.
The old scholar rises with dignity. The expression anhypothetical monkey has stung him to the core. He slams the door and runs back to his laboratory.
-Come back, shouts his boss.
Then, calling back her two guards, she points to me and tells them:
-Take this one back to his cell until he's taken care of. Then find that crazy old Sax for me. He's capable of anything now.
The two men don't seem to need any further explanation. They grab me and a few moments later I'm in my cell, thrown onto my bed, still bound and gagged.


  


 
 





























III - Our Man in Xanadu


 

























1
 

In the middle of the night, someone enters my room. I recognize him; it's Gogessos, my Lamanite cerberus. He carries a rope ladder wrapped around his shoulder. To my surprise, he unties my bonds and says:
-Two horses and a guide, with weapons and provisions for four days, are waiting for you at the bottom of the cliff. I'll help you down after tying this rope to your window.
He frees himself from the rope ladder and attaches it securely to the window bar.
At first, I think it's a trap.
-Why would you do this for me, I ask him.
-I'm not doing it for you, but for myself. Once in our lives, the Lamanite creed grants us to redeem ourselves from our faults by doing a good deed. By setting you free, I'm actually saving myself. Don't ask for more. Anyway, one day you'll be back here, you'll be back. It's not that easy to break free from the spell Norea has cast over us.
He points to the window. 
-There's no time to lose now. It'll be dawn in an hour, and you've got to be out of sight by then.
I lean over the void. The ground is at least two hundred feet below. 
-The ladder is long enough, reassures Gogessos. And it's solid. 
I hesitate, always wary of a trap. Then I make up my mind and step onto the ladder. 
After all, do I have a choice?
-I'll never forget what you do for me, Lamanite. 
-Again, I'm not doing it for you.
The vertiginous wall along which I'm climbing down gives me a real fright. But in a few moments I reach ground level without difficulty, where an Indian guide and two harnessed mustangs loaded with provisions, each with a rifle strapped to its side, await me. Gogessos hasn't lied. 
-We have enough food to reach the nearest post on the Osage road, says the guide. It's four days from here. Let's go, he adds in an imperious voice. It'll be daylight in less than an hour. 
We gallop off into the desert.
Our mounts carry us off at breakneck speed. As the sky takes on a yellow glow, we reach a mesa. We stop and look back. The Aquarius mountain range has become a monstrous chaos amidst the nighttime vapors that dawn is chasing away. Between the anonymous peaks, we can still clearly make out Mount Xanadu. 
Suddenly, for a brief moment, it's as if a volcanic eruption is about to erupt from the bowels of the earth. The mountain is shaken by a terrifying roar, followed by a frightful explosion. We watch in horror as its flanks split open, sway, the entire summit of Mount Xanadu lifts nearly a hundred meters into the air, hangs there as if gripped by a giant hand, and falls back to dust inside the newly created crater, leaving a huge cluster of swirling dust like a ghostly tombstone.
-It's Dr. Sax's laboratory that's just exploded, bringing with it the destruction of the center, exclaims the guide. Indeed, every gallery, every room was mined. It was to be expected with this crazy old man. He had done this to avenge the affront of his mistress and for having failed to regain authority over her. Norea had warned us that he was capable of anything.
-And Norea, will she have disappeared with the center, too?
-Disappeared? A daughter of Atala and Eve doesn't die. No, she'd been planning this sort of thing for a long time. It was she who had the galleries mined. She and her most loyal collaborators will have managed to escape aboard her private Spacemobile.
A pink sun rises over this cataclysm. 
And, indeed, the roar of an engine can be heard growing in the air. A black dot emerges from the mountain, growing rapidly. The engine turns south-west before disappearing.
We continue on our way.












The desert! The lunar Osage Desert: a bleak bistre plain suddenly solidified by the wildest of cataclysms, an abandoned, uninhabited plateau, the land of thirst and hunger at the end of the living world. An immense pale gray carpet almost flattened against the sky, gray at this hour too. The desert! Not a sound. 
So, no, nothing, not a sound. Nothing is more horrifying than this frightful tangle of waves frozen in escarpments and ravines, this false plain all tapped with caves, this stony desert disturbed by the bitter cries of coyotes, where you go round and round, endlessly, without ever being able to get out when you have the misfortune to enter it.
Wide expanses of darkness still persist, refusing to lighten.
According to my guide, it takes four days to reach the nearest outpost. From there, we'll have to make our way to the Santa Fe line. In the wells he's found, we can only find muddy water, though enough for our horses.
I've already forgotten about Norea and her plans. All I can think about is the scorching heat we have to avoid. We must be careful to conserve our water and food.
We ride in the shadow of a large natural sand dyke, made by the wind. We climb it. The crumbling sand leaks under our horses' hooves like a wave. When we reach its crest, it reveals nothing but more dikes, all the same, with no end in sight. 
In the dreadful desert, like a mass of gloomy frozen blisters, we discover, hidden by one of these ridges, a very wide ravine of red clay, which we take. It looks like petrified waves of blood. It forks and we soon arrive in front of a sandy valley, made as if by a single gust of wind. The horses have the dull, uncertain gait that comes with immense fatigue. We have to keep their reins very short. 
Large stone squares that look like lava. Coyote tracks half erased by the wind. The frightening heat doesn't abate until five o'clock in the evening. Sitting on a large rock, we watch the west turn red and the sun plunge into its congealing blood.
We decide to camp here for the night. I'm surprised by my guide. He's hardly spoken a word in hours. I wonder what he's thinking.
The next morning, when I wake up, I'm fixed. The guide has disappeared with the two mustangs, the weapons and the provisions. Trust the good savage. Especially when he's assimilated our marketing and after-sales methods.
 







 



2


 The sky is red, the earth completely black. Nothing around me, nothing except, from time to time, a great bird of prey soaring into space, then suddenly capsizing. The heat is shaping up to be appalling. Tremendous numbers of scorpions. I walk all day long among huge charred rocks. When I reach their summit, the heat is torrid. In their shadow, it's the asphyxiating shadow of a furnace. I can't stand this stuffy feeling. 
What a strange country this desert is. It brings to mind Aeschylus' Thessaly, the heaps of mountains that giants piled up to reach the gods. This never-ending plain drags over it swathes of clouds a sinister mephitic yellow. It's hopelessly uniform. 
I move forward without hesitation. I walk without thinking. I forget I'm walking. I have to gouge myself to remember. Branches and thorns scratch my face, hands and knees. I keep tripping over trunks and roots. Every time I get stuck, I say to myself: If I stumble, I'll never get up again.
Above my head, without stopping, bitterns circle in the blue sky. I'm in terrible pain. I want to stop and sit down. I close my eyes and keep going.
I know that if I stop walking, I'll die. I'm at the end of my rope and I can't go any further except by sheer force of will. I stagger forward, one foot hesitating in front of the other.
I can see the opening of a well. I almost run for the last few meters. At last I reach it.
It's empty! Completely empty!

Then, all at once, I understand the atrocity of this country. The sun has just fallen on the dead plain. On all sides, blue shadows crawl up into the sky, expelling the glorious colors of the day. The northern horizon is tinged with pearl-grey, while at the zenith crimson clouds, arranged like the tuft of a gigantic mane, stretch beneath the blue canopy. These rays of flame darken, and the azure zones take on a pearly pallor. Bushes, rocks, earth, everything looks as hard as bronze. I cross the brazen sea of Adoniram. The slightest accidents in the terrain, multiplied by mirages, take on gigantic dimensions. And in the air floats a golden dust so fine that it mixes with the vibration of light.
There's no sound, except for the occasional jackal in the desert, far, far away.
Atop a mesa that rises like an island in the middle of this ocean, a man sits on a narrow ledge plateau, a round, half-moon-shaped terrace above the cliff. Climbing a steep path, I reach his hut, made of planks, dried mud and reeds, without a door, with a flat roof supported by three forked trees. Countless fleas. In front of the hut a sign bears these words:

The leech’s kiss, the squid’s embrace, the prurient         ape’s defiling touch.
And what do you think of the human race? Not much - that means you, stranger.
KEEP OUT ! 

In the little Spartan shack I see a jug with a loaf of black bread. In the middle, on a wooden stele, a thick book. On the floor, here and there spartan nets, two or three mats, a basket and a knife.
You can hear the coyotes yelping as night approaches.
This despicable old desert rat has a stunted beard, long hair and a sheepskin tunic. He sits cross-legged, smoking peyote. He turns his old, tanned leather face, cracked and eroded by time, towards me, his dark, penetrating eyes squinting as he examines me. 
He asks me:
-Didn't you read the sign? And who are you?
-My name won't mean a thing to you. I got lost in the desert on a Sunday walk. Would you be so kind as to tell me to whom I owe the honor?
-I'm La Salle, Jack La Salle. 
-I thought you were found dead on the shores of the North Canadian River...
- It was not me but a counterfeited hoax produced in Doctor Sax’s labs at the Xanadu research Center. People are ready to believe any fake news, nowadays. Just like yourself, Norea first wanted to let me loose in the desert, but one of her agents helped me escaping from the center, providing me with a guide, a horse and provisions. And as it happened to you, my guide left me alone in the desert and fled with the horses and provisions. I managed to survive as I was found by indigenous tribesmen who set me on this hill and ensure my supply.
-But why didn’t you return to civilized life ?
-Civilized life ? I no longer know what these words mean. I’ll never return to your civilized life. I’d rather prefer dying forty times than going back to that. This experience has taught me more than enough on what can be expected from mankind. Here: have some peyote anyway.
He hands me a button, which I consider with suspicion. 
-Take it. It's better than benzedrine. It's genuine lophophora williamsii. Its psycho-physiological effects are most remarkable, provoking an extraordinary refinement of the senses, particularly with regard to the perception of colors, shapes and sounds... Its ingestion leaves no harmful after-effects, but it does cause nausea. No, there's no risk of addiction. Please, have some.
As soon as the sun has disappeared, La Salle lets out a deep sigh and, looking towards the horizon:
-Another day! Another day is over! How lonely! What a bore! Ah, woe is me! In the good old days, I wasn't so miserable. Won't it end! Twenty times death! I can't take it anymore! Enough, enough!
He turns in circles on the rocky slab, then stops.
Suddenly, in a fissure, Spacemobiles forming a triangular battalion pass by, like a piece of metal whose edges are shaking.
The man looks at them.
-These are the last survivors of Atlantis, on their way to Orion. If only I could follow them!
The space is filled with bleak cackles, plaintive howls that begin to tear the darkness and overexcite our nerves. In the whitish darkness of the night, on the threshold of the hole that serves as a door to the hut, two small green balls, then two other balls, also green, then two others, all, two by two, equidistant, appear. A soft rustle... Muzzles point out, with erect ears and bright eyes. The man walks towards them. 
-Wretched coyotes, he shouts.
Gravel collapses, the beasts flee. 
-They're my only company, he says, laughing bitterly.
The night is calm. The many stars are pulsating. I can only hear the sound of tarantulas. The moon spreads its shrouded light over the surrounding dunes. 
La Salle sits down again and crosses his arms.
-Forty years, more than forty years I've spent moaning on this rock! Without a woman... That's the price you have to pay to become a Buddha, to return to the Pleroma. My life is a perpetual martyrdom! In the good old days, my friend David D'Angelli used to say to me: Your Buddhism is nothing but the remnants of manichaeism, admit it, Jack. Reading the books of the Beat generation authors, Jack Kerouac, Allan Ginsberg and Billy Burroughs introduced me to Gnosis as these authors learned it in the '40s from their professor Raymond Weaver at Columbia University. In 1959, Kerouac wrote Doctor Sax, a mythical reverie of a book that described Doctor Sax, Knight of an Anti-Evil and his attempts to save the world from the Great World Serpent of evil with its mouth of death. The serpent, with its scaly, hooting back is a flood of evil and anger and Satan; and Doctor Sax, with his big floppy hat (like Captain Ahab - their professor was a Melville scholar), searches the world over for herbs that he knows will one day succeed in making into an alchemical poison that would kill the Serpent. 
I can't tell Jack La Salle or his doppelganger that I've met Dr. Sax and that the Snake has had the last word. No, I can't tell him, because he'd think I was crazy.
La Salle continues:
-See this book?
He picks up the thick book and lights a candle.
-It contains the story of the prophet Mani. After reading it, I stopped taking drugs. I decided to study manichaeism instead. We were idiots with our super-market Buddhism in the sixties. We knew nothing. We hadn't studied anything. Manichaeism is a much more powerful drug than benzedrine. I think - in fact, I've always thought - that people who take drugs are idiots. There's no drug more effective than literature, especially manichean literature…
-Did you meet Mani?
-During my stay at the Xanadu Center, I hijacked its time machine and was teleported to Baghdad in search of Mani. I wanted to do a people story for the readers of The New Day, my newspaper. And I was fed up with official messiahs, you see. It's always the same old story with them. The theme hasn't changed in two thousand years. But with Mani, it's a different matter... However his party's office was closed. One of his followers had told me that the Master had left on the Silk Road, heading for the Qumran province in Mongolia. I hired a cab and took myself there. 
Only to learn that Mani, who called himself Buddha, had been flayed alive with a reed point and his tanned skin hung out to dry on the gates of Ctesiphon, the capital of the Parthians, where he had gone to sell his newspaper. And not a television cameraman to shoot the scene. No soundman to record his last words. His disciples used his parchment skin to write them down. It wasn't a hologram. Mani didn't make movies. He was a goliardo, a vagabond, a Dharma tramp, on the road all his life. He was the true precursor of the Beat generation. From the Mediterranean to China, thanks to his website, Mani.com, one of the best designed in the Middle East, his network, of which he was the sole administrator, covered more territory than Christianity, Islam or even Communism ever did. 
-The louse was in the nasturtium, I say.
-It had to be eliminated. The fascist power of the Evil Empire, remotely controlled by Meta's Grand Vizier, Mark Sugarloaf and his Archons, and the CIA, set about doing just that. I'm writing a novel about Mani and the resurgence of Manichaeism in the modern world. It's my way of waging war on bigotry, ignorance and fanaticism. I could easily convert my story into a space opera. I think I'll call it The Fellahin Apocalypse and revise my journal accordingly. Will you now leave me alone to work in peace ?
I leave the San Antonio of the New World on his rock and set off down the cliff. The darkness around me begins to lighten and I can see the arid plain, covered with steep mounds and jagged edges. The sky is turning white. At dawn, the sand smokes on the horizon like dust from a censer.
At last, day comes. And like the curtains of a tabernacle being lifted, golden clouds roll in, uncovering the sky. Then a frightening spectacle unfolds before my eyes: first the flagship of the rebel fleet, then those of its principal leaders, followed finally by the entire Fellahin armada, rising from the rubble of the center of Xanadu, invades space with a bewildering roar to join its leader. Then it disappears.
All that remains on the horizon is the disc of the rising sun, in the middle of which shines Mani's face.
I keep walking.

 
 
 












3
 

It's deserted, stupid and pitiful. And now this desert has closed behind me. I see only desolate plains, with extinguished craters, under an empty sky. I'm unable to find the path that brought me here, because the bushes and roots hide the traces of my passage, the grasses have once again reared up and the wind on the sand has erased the marks of my footsteps.
The pebbles shine, bathed in violet color. I can't even decide which way to go. Between the bushes I can see on the horizon, behind the veil of dust, a jagged mountain ridge. A ravine, which seems to get deeper the closer I get, separates me from it. It's a canyon at the bottom of which I can make out the presence of a river. I start to descend the cliff, clinging to the sparse thorny branches. 
A dark torrent below me roars. It rolls its black and white waters between the high banks. Exhausted, I listen for a long time to their tumult. Daylight is fading with incredible rapidity. Thin slivers of moonlight now shine on the waves. The sound of the torrent seems to grow. In the black riverbed, each pebble has a crown of white foam. I follow the small, incised torrent, its waters tormented by huge boulders. I follow its meandering course in search of a ford, eventually unable to remember how long ago it was, as I slide along the increasingly narrow cliff face. The brownish waters leap between rocks encircled by foam. I can't take it any more. 
We can now make out the full moon, which looks like a round piece of ice, full of motionless light. I collapse, drop to the edge of the muddy, leaden torrent, lamenting mournfully beneath the already darkened skies, drown in the sand between the stones, while the roar increases due to the resonance, and, woe betide! I'm swept away by a tumultuous rapid, tumbled, thrown over rocks as green as emeralds, over which I crawl to the entrance of a cavern from which a lively draught emerges with a hissing sound. 
I've always hated caves. Yet I rush in. The entrance is a narrow gut into which I have to crawl on my belly, dragging myself across the fine sand. I can no longer see the buzzing waters of the torrent, whose sound fades further and further behind me. The rock soon widens into a cirque. I reach a room cut into the living stone, supported by huge pillars with moldings and bizarre designs, whose capitals serve as roots for the ribs of the boldest vaults. 
It's an enchanted, satanic place. Scattered across the arches of this forest of stones, motionless and smiling, are the legions of figures from the Hall of Armor, their wide phosphorus eyes immovably fixed, and their colossal appearance imbues me with an intoxicating terror. I question the spectres of the Thule Society, the Templars, the Fellahin, all the descendants of the Atlanteans I thought had disappeared and who have gathered here, it seems, to taunt me. 
-Ah, I recognize you wretches! Sinister Angels of Destruction! Cursed Lamanites! In vain I thought I'd overcome your schemes. You want your prey, don't you? Knights, mages, lemurs, archangels, Trismegist Satans, men and ghosts, back! Back! You're all lies!
Panting and broken with fatigue, I begin to smell smoke in this sort of ancient troglodyte dwelling. If I can smell smoke, then someone must be living in this stinking darkness. The sour little cry of bats interrupts the silence. I stand up carefully so as not to hit the top of the vault too hard with my head, keeping both hands pressed to the rock as I move forward. The rock is so jagged that it looks animal-like, like shapeless vertebrae. The smell becomes more and more perceptible.
At a bend I see a fire in the middle of a wide gallery, oozing and full of smoke, a great orange glow in the thick mist. Scorpions slither among the stones. I approach, hearing another heavy, ragged breath, that of a hunchbacked, frighteningly haggard old woman, seated at a large table in the middle of a kind of monumental rock cathedra. Her face is an earthy gray, her eyelids haggard. Above her head, a halo of stalactites seems to transform her into some barbaric ancient pythia. To whom am I speaking? To Madame Sesostris, the famous clairvoyant herself, no doubt. 
Motionless, she stares at a large book. On the table are two silver torches and a dish containing trout and crayfish from the torrent, a heavy roast of red boar with a bean stew, a fricassee of partridge with peppers, a jig of venison with blueberries and half-full glasses of port, Hartz white wine, Marinca muscatel, heady Franconian wine, good Cape wine, as well as a famous bottle of Losari and a Léoville-Poyferré, 1881.
The old lady grabs a buire and fills a cup. With a sort of mocking smile, she says to me in a dolorous voice:
-Drink. Bleibronner 1846! One of Fuerto Tava's finest vintages. A special vintage! Bottled at King Arthur's Castle. A must with wild boar. And you'll get a little after-dinner liqueur. Kummel, Armagnac, white Chartreuse, Mirabelle, Fine Champagne, you name it.
She makes herself a cocktail, an Alexander, milk, gin, cocoa cream, as it should be. 
I drain the cup in one gulp. My exhausted gaze goes to the meat.
She sneers. Armed with a large carving knife, she saws a wide slice from the boar's quarter. She tosses it to me on a plate: floc!
-Eat up. These deserts and rocks are tiring, aren't they? But now you're allowed to rest a little. The champagne will have to wait. I haven't brought any bottles of Roederer up from the cellar yet.
Then she pours herself a Don Julio on the rocks tequila.
Squatting down, I devour the meat like a desperate man. My jaws clack together. Finally satisfied, I say to the old lady:
-That boar was just right. The food was perfect. The wines were delectable. And what a delightful spot for a Sunday picnic... What could be better! I'll never forget that lovely dining room, that roaring fire of red and blue flames that, after such a dreadful day, brought me much-needed comfort, Norea. It's nice and cozy here, but I can't afford to waste any more time.
She laughs.
Then, with a sort of hiccup and stammering:
-No, don't laugh at me. I've recognized you. I don't want anything. I'm giving up the trip. I don't want this fatigue anymore! I give up... I just want to get out of this macabre cave, go home, find the way I came. Take pity on my long misery!
-I doubt you'll ever see the light again, little boy. Behold, in my hands I hold the authentic and complete version of the apocryphal Critias. I brought it here for fear you'd steal it and run away. 

She opens the book and flips through it with her fingertips.
-This fifteenth-century incunabulum was written in the most famous forgery factory of the late Middle Ages, Glastonbury Abbey. A copy of the second version of the Critias arrived here, along with other oriental manuscripts brought by commercial travelers from Damascus. But to prevent it falling into unholy hands, a special measure will not be superfluous.
She says. And, with her harpy nails at the end of her disproportionately long, hooked, spider-leg-like fingers, this stunted monster with its flabby, pendulous teats begins to tear, piece by piece and parcel by parcel, the soft pages of the incunabulum. She shreds them in her mouth, and chews them slowly as if consuming the consecrated host and wanting to make flesh of this heretical book. 
Fascinated, I look at her and can't quite understand what's happening. Then I regain control of myself, lean forward and cry out:
-What are you doing?
Norea smiles, revealing her bloodless gums, while a yellowish drool drips from her pale lips onto her chin. Her face is an earthy gray; her eyes haggard.
She's laughing. And it almost looks like she's crying.
I can barely stifle a cry. And as I try to snatch the book from her hands, she moves backwards, clutching the incunabulum tightly to her chest with her left hand, while with her right hand she continues to tear out the pages and stuff them into her mouth, as if she wanted to consume her prey as quickly as possible.
Damnation! She's going to swallow the whole of Plato. And she's going to die. I've got to do something, fast.
Norea rises into the air. She floats to a door at the end of the cavern and, without touching it, disappears.
In the middle of the room, only the fire remains, ready to die at any moment now.

 
 
   



4
 

I leave the cave. I reach the water's edge. I can barely make out the other shore. I see a few reflections on the waves. I listen to its roar for a long moment.
Then, on the muddy, black, swirling water, a sailless boat glides by. We hear the sound of the waves being struck in cadence by the flat of the oars. Drops of water sparkle, phosphorescent. At the helm stands an old, blind man in shiny boots and oilskin. He's armed with an oar that he holds high over his shoulder, as if ready to strike.
It's a metal boat, a thick mass of rust with a name on its prow: Atropos. In the muggy darkness, it comes thudding to shore. It barely sways, the oar resting on the dark sand. The old man moors the boat. Water laps against its sides. Then a strangely gentle voice:
-I am Robur. Robur the Conqueror. I am the Master of the World. And who are you? What are you waiting for? Can you hear me?
I collapse, the muddy waves licking my whole body, and the old man picks me up, throws me into the bottom of the boat and launches it back into the water. And we glide, pushed by the wind, between the two banks of the river. A salty air hits my nostrils. In the distance, jets of water rise up, thrown by whales. Cetacean skeletons whiten in the crevices of the cliffs. Then he shouts:
-You wanted to go to Atlantis? I know, I know you. It's too late to back out, I've come to take you there.
Then I lose consciousness.


 


 
 








5
 

When I wake up, I'm lying in a comfortable bed at Woodward County Hospital. 
-I've been quite ill, haven't I?
-Very, very sick, the doctors tell me. You were found half-dead and delirious on the southeast trail by Rangers in the New Mexico desert.
-How and why was I brought back here, when I was on my way to Los Angeles?
-Since your Social Security card listed Woodward as your home, you were flown back here by helicopter, at the expense of Albuquerque Medical Social Services. I hope you have a good insurance, because the cost of your repatriation and your stay could be expensive. 
-What does the Rangers' report say?
-You said your name was Jonas and that you'd spent three hellish days in the hold of a nuclear submarine. You spoke incoherently about a lost manuscript, a pythia or sibyl named Norea, Horaia or Houaria, a network of secret, mined tunnels in the mountains and a galactic conspiracy, according to the Rangers. We can tell you, now that you're completely out of it. Eight days of furious crisis, then a week of perhaps even more impressive despondency, during which you didn't open your mouth again. 
Barely back on my feet, back at the Woodward Daily Press, I explain the reasons for my involuntary return to the editor-in-chief, who listens to me with the greatest attention. I ask his permission to write an account of my misadventure. He gives me carte blanche and puts a desk at my disposal - my first desk as a future reporter. 
I start typing on my keyboard my first story, which will also be the only one for the Woodward Daily Press, the story of my journey through the desert. For two weeks, I write non-stop the article that Temple Houston should have signed. The young journalist-lawyer, investigating the death of Jack La Salle, had tracked him down to Xanadu. And, too imbued with the writings of La Salle, he'd invented imaginary worlds where he'd let himself get caught up in his own game. But in his search for a way out, he had discovered the truth.
In a sense, this loser had won.
I sign my text with the name Jack La Salle and hand it to the editor, asking him to keep it in his archives. 
- It's not a news story, I say.
-What is it, then? he asks.
-Just the continuation of a tale that started right here, in this very newspaper, once upon a time, and which could have been true.
As for me, at the earliest opportunity I promise to retrace the steps of Norea, the Archons' companion.
Besides, I won't have long to wait.
 









I leave the editorial office and head for home. A Range Rover is parked on the opposite sidewalk. A man is leaning against the hood, watching me. He's quietly smoking a cigarette. I recognize him. He says to me:
-Hello to you, stranger.
-Greetings to you, Lamanite.
Yes, it's Gogessos, my guardian. 
After a moment's silence, the Indian adds:
-Now, come. Norea has come back for you. She's waiting for you. 
Didn't he warn me? It's not so easy to get rid of the spell your mistress has cast over you. Now, even if I'd wanted to, there's no time to back out.
So let's get back on the road together, the dreadful road you can't avoid going down, when you feel the hand, the rough hand of the daughter of the Archons, grabbing yours and pulling you along. For you are not master of the characters you give birth to. 


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

